⭐ 9	alvivar/pi-link	A WebSocket-based inter-terminal communication system that creates a local network between multiple Pi coding agent terminals. Enables terminals to discover each other, exchange messages, and orchestrate work across agents, all automatically on localhost.
⭐ 99	lucidrains/deep-cross-attention	Implementation of the proposed DeepCrossAttention by Heddes et al at Google research, in Pytorch
⭐ 991	hrithikkoduri/WebRover	WebRover is an autonomous AI agent designed to interpret user input and execute actions by interacting with web elements to accomplish tasks or answer questions. It leverages advanced language models and web automation tools to navigate the web, gather information, and provide structured responses based on the user's needs.
⭐ 9759	microsoft/magentic-ui	A research prototype of a human-centered web agent
⭐ 94204	microsoft/markitdown	Python tool for converting files and office documents to Markdown.
⭐ 91	aus-der-Technik/FileMonitor	Watch for file changes in a directory with a unified API on Linux and macOS.
⭐ 9174	microsoft/agent-framework	A framework for building, orchestrating and deploying AI agents and multi-agent workflows with support for Python and .NET.
⭐ 85	pietrop/slate-transcript-editor	A React component to make correcting automated transcriptions of audio and video easier and faster. Using the SlateJs editor.
⭐ 85857	microsoft/playwright	Playwright is a framework for Web Testing and Automation. It allows testing Chromium, Firefox and WebKit with a single API. 
⭐ 85063	microsoft/ML-For-Beginners	12 weeks, 26 lessons, 52 quizzes, classic Machine Learning for all
⭐ 812	ableplayer/ableplayer	fully accessible cross-browser HTML5 media player. 
⭐ 783	thedaviddias/llms-txt-hub	🤖 The largest directory for AI-ready documentation and tools implementing the proposed llms.txt standard
⭐ 76	brumik/ollama-obsidian-indexer	ollama-obsidian-indexer
⭐ 7142	microsoft/playwright-cli	CLI for common Playwright actions. Record and generate Playwright code, inspect selectors and take screenshots.
⭐ 713	jlumbroso/passage-of-time-mcp	🤖🕰️ An MCP server that gives language models temporal awareness and time calculation abilities. Teaching AI the significance of the passage of time through collaborative tool development.
⭐ 699	10up/classifai	Supercharge WordPress Content Workflows and Engagement with Artificial Intelligence.
⭐ 672	hmans/beans	A CLI-based, flat-file issue tracker for humans and robots. 🤖
⭐ 6488	NVIDIA/warp	A Python framework for GPU-accelerated simulation, robotics, and machine learning.
⭐ 6284	sirredbeard/awesome-wsl	Awesome list dedicated to Windows Subsystem for Linux
⭐ 613	bbc/react-transcript-editor	A React component to make correcting automated transcriptions of audio and video easier and faster. By BBC News Labs. - Work in progress
⭐ 5	lsj5031/PiSwarm	
⭐ 5	brucemcpherson/bmUnitTester	bmUnitTester created by GasGit automation
⭐ 5990	serialport/node-serialport	Access serial ports with JavaScript. Linux, OSX and Windows. Welcome your robotic JavaScript overlords. Better yet, program them!
⭐ 576	ChristopherLyon/graphrag-workbench	Interactive 3D visualization of knowledge graphs generated by Microsoft GraphRAG. Explore entities, relationships, and communities with immersive visual analytics.
⭐ 573	treflehq/trefle-api	🍀 Trefle is a botanical JSON REST API for plants species, allowing you to search and query over all the registered species, and build the next gardening apps and farming robots.
⭐ 5734	Slackadays/Clipboard	😎🏖️🐬 Your new, 𝙧𝙞𝙙𝙤𝙣𝙠𝙪𝙡𝙞𝙘𝙞𝙤𝙪𝙨𝙡𝙮 smart clipboard manager
⭐ 56837	microsoft/autogen	A programming framework for agentic AI
⭐ 566	jsantell/THREE.IK	inverse kinematics for three.js
⭐ 55219	AntonOsika/gpt-engineer	CLI platform to experiment with codegen. Precursor to: https://lovable.dev
⭐ 508	makafeli/n8n-workflow-builder	AI assistant integration for n8n workflow automation through Model Context Protocol (MCP). Connect Claude Desktop, ChatGPT, and other AI assistants to n8n for natural language workflow management.
⭐ 485	SethGammon/Citadel	Agent orchestration harness for Claude Code. Four-tier routing (/do), campaign persistence across sessions, parallel agents in isolated worktrees, discovery relay between waves, lifecycle hooks, circuit breaker, and 6 production-quality skills. From solo developer to institutional scale.
⭐ 460	comet-ml/opik-openclaw	Official plugin for OpenClaw that exports agent traces to Opik. See and monitor agent behaviour, cost, tokens, errors and more.
⭐ 44	mikekelly/gap	Give AI agents secure access to your accounts - without sharing your credentials
⭐ 431	theredsix/agent-browser-protocol	Deterministic browser automation. Works out of the box with Claude/Codex/OpenCode
⭐ 42	ogulcancelik/pi-extensions	Extensions for pi, the terminal-based coding agent
⭐ 4131	newton-physics/newton	An open-source, GPU-accelerated physics simulation engine built upon NVIDIA Warp, specifically targeting roboticists and simulation researchers.
⭐ 38926	mindsdb/mindsdb	Query Engine for AI Analytics: Build self-reasoning agents across all your live data
⭐ 381	saml-dev/obsidian-custom-js	An Obsidian plugin to allow users to reuse code blocks across all devices and OSes
⭐ 37741	microsoft/VibeVoice	Open-Source Frontier Voice AI
⭐ 36098	ueberdosis/tiptap	The headless rich text editor framework for web artisans.
⭐ 34756	microsoft/Data-Science-For-Beginners	10 Weeks, 20 Lessons, Data Science for All!
⭐ 34624	google-ai-edge/mediapipe	Cross-platform, customizable ML solutions for live and streaming media.
⭐ 33965	khoj-ai/khoj	Your AI second brain. Self-hostable. Get answers from the web or your docs. Build custom agents, schedule automations, do deep research. Turn any online or local LLM into your personal, autonomous AI (gpt, claude, gemini, llama, qwen, mistral). Get started - free.
⭐ 32075	microsoft/graphrag	A modular graph-based Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system
⭐ 30502	microsoft/playwright-mcp	Playwright MCP server
⭐ 2	kylebrodeur/universal-agent-context	Universal context system for AI agents: discover, translate, and manage agent skills across formats. Includes MCP server, CLI, and Python library.
⭐ 2	dvrosalesm/pi-notetaker	
⭐ 28235	vercel-labs/agent-browser	Browser automation CLI for AI agents
⭐ 2801	openrecall/openrecall	OpenRecall is a fully open-source, privacy-first alternative to proprietary solutions like Microsoft's Windows Recall. With OpenRecall, you can easily access your digital history, enhancing your memory and productivity without compromising your privacy.
⭐ 27811	Budibase/budibase	AI agents, automations and apps that run your operations. Model agnostic.
⭐ 27808	lightpanda-io/browser	Lightpanda: the headless browser designed for AI and automation
⭐ 27670	microsoft/semantic-kernel	Integrate cutting-edge LLM technology quickly and easily into your apps
⭐ 25672	dapr/dapr	Dapr is a portable runtime for building distributed applications across cloud and edge, combining event-driven architecture with workflow orchestration.
⭐ 24618	microsoft/OmniParser	A simple screen parsing tool towards pure vision based GUI agent
⭐ 24268	charmbracelet/glow	Render markdown on the CLI, with pizzazz! 💅🏻
⭐ 2007	guinmoon/LLMFarm	llama and other  large language models on iOS and MacOS offline using GGML library.
⭐ 1	kylebrodeur/ux-collab	Visual-first UI/UX collaboration for AI agents — browser automation, screenshot comparison, wireframes, design tokens, and the 8-step design loop.
⭐ 19	Swatikp/save-notes-chrome-extension	This is a simple chrome extension that will let you create notes and save important bullet points from any article.
⭐ 19787	mvanhorn/last30days-skill	AI agent skill that researches any topic across Reddit, X, YouTube, HN, Polymarket, and the web - then synthesizes a grounded summary
⭐ 18721	comet-ml/opik	Debug, evaluate, and monitor your LLM applications, RAG systems, and agentic workflows with comprehensive tracing, automated evaluations, and production-ready dashboards.
⭐ 183594	microsoft/vscode	Visual Studio Code
⭐ 183083	n8n-io/n8n	Fair-code workflow automation platform with native AI capabilities. Combine visual building with custom code, self-host or cloud, 400+ integrations.
⭐ 1816	inlife/nexrender	📹  Data-driven render automation for After Effects
⭐ 175	brumik/obsidian-ollama-chat	A plugin for chatting with you obsidian notes trough local Ollama LLM instead of Chat GTP.
⭐ 175881	flutter/flutter	Flutter makes it easy and fast to build beautiful apps for mobile and beyond
⭐ 1702	openfarmcc/OpenFarm	A free and open database for farming and gardening knowledge. You can grow anything!
⭐ 16	brucemcpherson/bmVuetemplate	bmVuetemplate created by GasGit automation
⭐ 16840	cure53/DOMPurify	DOMPurify - a DOM-only, super-fast, uber-tolerant XSS sanitizer for HTML, MathML and SVG. DOMPurify works with a secure default, but offers a lot of configurability and hooks. Demo:
⭐ 16656	microsoft/agent-lightning	The absolute trainer to light up AI agents.
⭐ 16138	steven-tey/novel	Notion-style WYSIWYG editor with AI-powered autocompletion.
⭐ 1419	ehmicky/cross-platform-node-guide	📗 How to write cross-platform Node.js code
⭐ 1400	covibes/zeroshot	Your autonomous engineering team in a CLI. Point Zeroshot at an issue, walk away, and return to production-grade code. Supports Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, OpenCode, and Gemini CLI.
⭐ 131455	microsoft/PowerToys	Microsoft PowerToys is a collection of utilities that supercharge productivity and customization on Windows
⭐ 13143	microsoft/RustTraining	Beginner, advanced, expert level Rust training material
⭐ 12	Wikia/jwplayer-fandom	JWPlayer configuration
⭐ 1263	Developer-Mike/obsidian-advanced-canvas	⚡ Supercharge your canvas experience! Graph view integration and unlimited styling options empower flowcharts, dynamic presentations, and interconnected knowledge. 
⭐ 120804	electron/electron	:electron: Build cross-platform desktop apps with JavaScript, HTML, and CSS
⭐ 12062	paulmillr/chokidar	Minimal and efficient cross-platform file watching library
⭐ 118	rohitgandikota/sliderspace	SliderSpace: Decomposing the Visual Capabilities of Diffusion Models
⭐ 116	YuxingLu613/KARMA	Leveraging Multi-Agent LLMs for Automated Knowledge Graph Enrichment
⭐ 1162	fikrikarim/parlor	On-device, real-time multimodal AI. Have natural voice and vision conversations with an AI that runs entirely on your machine. Powered by Gemma 4 E2B and Kokoro.
⭐ 115	feross/capture-frame	Capture video screenshot from a `<video>` tag (at the current time)
⭐ 11547	microsoft/wslg	Enabling the Windows Subsystem for Linux to include support for Wayland and X server related scenarios
⭐ 113	aira-security/mcp-armor	MCP Armor continuously secures and monitors Model Context Protocol operations through static and dynamic scans, revealing hidden risks in agent-to-tool communications.
⭐ 109073	microsoft/generative-ai-for-beginners	21 Lessons, Get Started Building with Generative AI 
⭐ 1088	vercel-labs/workflow-builder-template	Visual AI workflow automation platform
⭐ 108464	microsoft/TypeScript	TypeScript is a superset of JavaScript that compiles to clean JavaScript output.
⭐ 105180	goldbergyoni/nodebestpractices	:white_check_mark:  The Node.js best practices list (July 2024)
⭐ 102592	microsoft/terminal	The new Windows Terminal and the original Windows console host, all in the same place!
