 

 

February 17-21, 2025, Paris, France 

 

 

 

PHYSICS-GUIDED NEURAL NETWORKS FOR LYAPUNOV-STABLE 

DYNAMIC SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION 

Fabian J. Roth*†, Maximilian Kannapinn†, Dominik K. Klein† and Oliver Weeger† 

 † Cyber-Physical Simulation Group, TU Darmstadt 

Dolivostraße 15, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany 

* fabian.roth.24@stud.tu-darmstadt.de 

 

 

Key Words: Dynamic system identification, port-Hamiltonian systems, Lyapunov stability 

 

ABSTRACT  

In recent years, nonlinear dynamic system identification using artificial neural networks has 

garnered attention due to its manifold potential applications in digital twins of engineering 

systems. However, purely data-driven machine learning algorithms typically require large 

amounts of training data and lack robustness, as they often suffer from poor extrapolation and 

are prone to making physically implausible forecasts. This makes it difficult to trust such 

models, especially since the learned dynamics can exhibit spurious instabilities. Physics-

guided machine learning seeks to resolve these challenges by integrating physical priors and 

inductive biases into the model architectures. This approach promises enhanced accuracy, 

robustness, and interpretability while reducing data requirements.  

The present work proposes stable port-Hamiltonian Neural Networks (sPHNNs) as a physics-

guided machine learning architecture for identifying nonlinear dynamic systems. The model 

leverages the port-Hamiltonian framework, enabling the representation of both conservative 

and dissipative dynamic systems with external inputs. By learning a constrained Hamiltonian 

energy function from data, the approach incorporates physical biases and stability guarantees. 

A balance equation regarding the learned energy is satisfied by design. This balance states that 

the stored energy within a system can, at most, grow by the amount of energy provided via the 

inputs. Stability is ensured by constraining the Hamiltonian energy function to be a convex, 

positive definite Lyapunov function. In the energy-conserving case, this approach guarantees 

the existence of a stable equilibrium and the boundedness of all solutions. For the strictly 

dissipative case, this guarantee extends to the global asymptotic stability of the equilibrium. 

The approach’s viability, limitations, and advantages are highlighted using illustrative 

examples. Further evaluation with real-world benchmark data demonstrates the sPHNN’s 

ability to generalize from sparse data, outperforming the purely data-driven approach and 

avoiding instability issues. In addition, the model's potential for data-driven reduced order 

modeling is highlighted by training it on multi-physics simulation data to construct a surrogate 

model. When utilizing augmented dimensions, the stability constraint enables a safe and stable 

exploration of the added flexibility. While sPHNNs are confined to modeling globally stable 

systems, in their applicable domain, they promote robustness and physically plausible 

dynamics. 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwaarXxtOjtXMfS8r8cKjrSbxeP-HcAnNtGSrO-R4vnyHuEnv2W1ZF10TEHRt6WOAuSX_351YT0QAuYTiyzYkpdEh4b5I9Sf_3rfqGzhTIt17YMq9b1fDzzHLKurOYRS_vDs3NG=w839-h1187-v0

83b54c76-727f-41dd-ba4e-f938241d8015