(PDF) Integrating human knowledge for explainable AI

Article PDF Available

Integrating human knowledge for explainable AI

October 2025

Machine Learning

https://www.researchgate.net/journal/Machine-Learning-1573-0565

 114(11)

DOI: 

10.1007/s10994-025-06879-x

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-025-06879-x?urlappend=%3Futm_source%3Dresearchgate.net%26utm_medium%3Darticle

License

CC BY 4.0

https://www.researchgate.net/deref/https%3A%2F%2Fcreativecommons.org%2Flicenses%2Fby%2F4.0%2F

Authors:

Eleonora Cappuccio

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Eleonora-Cappuccio

Italian National Research Council

https://www.researchgate.net/institution/Italian-National-Research-Council

Bahavathy Kathirgamanathan

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Bahavathy-Kathirgamanathan

University College Dublin

https://www.researchgate.net/institution/University_College_Dublin

Salvatore Rinzivillo

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Salvatore-Rinzivillo

Italian National Research Council

https://www.researchgate.net/institution/Italian-National-Research-Council

Gennady Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Gennady-Andrienko

Fraunhofer Institute for Intelligent Analysis and Information Systems

https://www.researchgate.net/institution/Fraunhofer-Institute-for-Intelligent-Analysis-and-Information-Systems

Show all 5 authors

https://www.researchgate.net/

 

Hide

https://www.researchgate.net/

Download full-text PDF

https://www.researchgate.net/journal/Machine-Learning-1573-0565/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI/links/68f0555ff3032e2b4be97de5/Integrating-human-knowledge-for-explainable-AI.pdf

 

Read full-text

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI#read

Download full-text PDF

https://www.researchgate.net/journal/Machine-Learning-1573-0565/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI/links/68f0555ff3032e2b4be97de5/Integrating-human-knowledge-for-explainable-AI.pdf

Read full-text

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI#read

Download citation

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI/citation/download

Copy link Link copied

Read full-text

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI#read

Download citation

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI/citation/download

Copy link Link copied

Citations (1)

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI#citations

References (44)

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI#references

Figures (16)

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396515788_Integrating_human_knowledge_for_explainable_AI#figures

Abstract and Figures

This paper presents a methodology for integrating human expert knowledge into machine learning (ML) workflows to improve both model interpretability and the quality of explanations produced by explainable AI (XAI) techniques. We strive to enhance standard ML and XAI pipelines without modifying underlying algorithms, focusing instead on embedding domain knowledge at two stages: (1) during model development through expert-guided data structuring and feature engineering, and (2) during explanation generation via domain-aware synthetic neighbourhoods. Visual analytics is used to support experts in transforming raw data into semantically richer representations. We validate the methodology in two case studies: predicting COVID-19 incidence and classifying vessel movement patterns. The studies demonstrated improved alignment of models with expert reasoning and better quality of synthetic neighbourhoods. We also explore using large language models (LLMs) to assist experts in developing domain-compliant data generators. Our findings highlight both the benefits and limitations of existing XAI methods and point to a research direction for addressing these gaps.

Integrating human expertise into the ML pipeline. Knowledge is embedded through data structuring and realistic neighbourhood generation, supporting model interpretability and explanation plausibility …

https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Integrating-human-expertise-into-the-ML-pipeline-Knowledge-is-embedded-through-data_fig1_396515788

Visualisation of weekly episodes derived from time series of COVID-19 incidence and population mobility in provinces of Spain. The horizontal dimension represents time, the rows correspond to the provinces, and the cells represent the episodes coloured by the levels of disease incidence (left, from green for low to red for high) and mobility (right, from red for very low to blue for normal) …

https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Visualisation-of-weekly-episodes-derived-from-time-series-of-COVID-19-incidence-and_fig2_396515788

Visual representation of temporal contexts of four selected examples of pandemic events from different classes by disease incidence. The columns of the matrices correspond to the weeks from -6 to -1 preceding the events. Each row corresponds to one level of either COVID-19 (top 4 rows) or mobility (lower 4 rows). The filled cells signify which levels of COVID-19 and mobility were attained before the events started. The colours of the filled rectangles reflect the classes (levels) of the represented events …

https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Visual-representation-of-temporal-contexts-of-four-selected-examples-of-pandemic-events_fig3_396515788

Comparison of different versions of the pandemic level model by visual inspection of the distributions of model errors over time (horizontal dimension) and provinces (vertical dimension). The events are represented by horizontal bars with model errors encoded by the colours. Shades of blue and red signify, respectively, under and over-estimation of the pandemic event level; the darkness is proportional to the difference between the predicted and actual levels …

https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Comparison-of-different-versions-of-the-pandemic-level-model-by-visual-inspection-of-the_fig4_396515788

 +11

https://www.researchgate.net/figure/On-the-left-The-COVID-19-and-Mobility-transition-matrices-used-as-constraints-to_fig5_396515788

On the left: The COVID-19 and Mobility transition matrices used as constraints to generate neighbourhoods. On the right: Bipartite graphs with the probabilities for COVID-19 (Left) and Mobility (Right) state transitions. The thickness of each arc is proportional to the probability of the transition …

https://www.researchgate.net/figure/On-the-left-The-COVID-19-and-Mobility-transition-matrices-used-as-constraints-to_fig5_396515788

Figures - available from: Machine Learning

This content is subject to copyright. 

Terms and conditions

https://go.nature.com/2Saqenj

 apply.

 

Discover the world's research

25+ million members

160+ million publication pages

2.3+ billion citations

Join for free

https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html

Publisher Full-text 1

Access to this full-text is provided by Springer.

Learn more

https://help.researchgate.net/hc/en-us/articles/24012471222545-Journals-on-ResearchGate#publisherfulltexts

Content available from Machine Learning

This content is subject to copyright. 

Terms and conditions

https://go.nature.com/2Saqenj

 apply.

Received: 3 April 2025 / Revised: 7 July 2025 / Accepted: 25 August 2025 /

Published online: 15 October 2025

© The Author(s) 2025

Editors: Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Dino Pedreschi.

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

Integrating human knowledge for explainable AI

EleonoraCappuccio 1 · BahavathyKathirgamanathan 2 · Salva toreRinzivillo 1 ·

GennadyAndrienko 2,3 · NataliaAndrienko 2,3

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-025-06879-x

Abstract

This paper presents a methodology for integrating human expert knowledge into machine

learning (ML) workows to improve both model interpretability and the quality of expla-

nations produced by explainable AI (XAI) techniques. We strive to enhance standard ML

and XAI pipelines without modifying underlying algorithms, focusing instead on embed-

ding domain knowledge at two stages: (1) during model development through expert-

guided data structuring and feature engineering, and (2) during explanation generation via

domain-aware synthetic neighbourhoods. V isual analytics is used to support experts in

transforming raw data into semantically richer representations. We validate the methodol-

ogy in two case studies: predicting COVID-19 incidence and classifying vessel movement

patterns. The studies demonstrated improved alignment of models with expert reasoning

and better quality of synthetic neighbourhoods. We also explore using large language

models (LLMs) to assist experts in developing domain-compliant data generators. Our

ndings highlight both the benets and limitations of existing XAI methods and point to

a research direction for addressing these gaps.

Keywords Knowledge-guided explainable AI (XAI) · V isual analytics · T rustworthy AI

1 Introduction

Explainable AI (XAI) systems often produce explanations that, while technically accurate,

fail to align with domain experts' understanding and reasoning processes (Liao & V arshney,

2021; Abdul et al., 2018). This misalignment occurs because conventional machine learning

(ML) and XAI approaches lack systematic mechanisms for incorporating domain expertise,

relying instead solely on data-driven methods that often fail to capture meaningful domain

concepts and relationships (von Rueden et al., 2023).

1 3

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

W e hypothesize that systematic integration of domain knowledge can make ML models

more understandable to humans by ensuring that both model behaviour and explanations

align with expert mental models (Simkute et al., 2022; Kulesza et al., 2013). However,

achieving this integration remains a critical challenge. While there exist some approaches

to incorporating knowledge, e.g., physics-informed neural networks (Raissi et al., 2019) or

domain-constrained architectures (Muralidhar et al., 2018), they require customized algo-

rithms and substantial manual engineering, limiting their applicability in general-purpose

ML pipelines.

This paper addresses the following research question: How can domain expert knowl-

edge be incorporated into both ML models and their explanations without modifying exist-

ing, widely used ML and XAI algorithms?

W e tackle this question by addressing two technical challenges. First, standard ML pipe-

lines rely on statistical feature extraction from raw data and do not reect how experts

conceptualize data structures. For instance, time series data are typically processed as

sequences of points, whereas experts often interpret them through higher-level episodes

or patterns. We argue that the standard ML workow Raw Data

→

Automated Fea-

ture Extraction

→

Model Training should be enhanced with expert-guided data

structuring: Raw Data

→

Expert Knowledge Integration

→

Structured

Representations

→

Model Training.

Second, many XAI methods work by creating synthetic neighbours around a data point

to understand how the model behaves in that local area (Guidotti et al., 2019b; Adadi & Ber-

rada, 2018). However, these synthetic examples often violate domain-specic constraints,

resulting in implausible or misleading explanations. W e propose to modify the current XAI

approach Query Instance

→

Random Synthetic Neighbours

→

Model

Predictions

→

Explanations by embedding domain knowledge into neighbour-

hood generation: Query Instance

→

Domain-Aware Synthetic Neighbours

→

Model Predictions

→

Realistic Explanations. The resulting explana-

tions are expected to be logically consistent with expert knowledge.

In summary, our proposed framework (outlined in Section 3 following the review of

related work in Section 2) incorporates domain knowledge at two stages: (1) through

visual analytics-supported data structuring and feature engineering during model develop-

ment (Section 3.1), and (2) through domain-constrained neighbourhood generation during

explanation (Section 3.2). This approach enables domain experts to meaningfully shape the

model and its interpretability, while remaining compatible with standard, widely used ML

and XAI tools.

W e validate the framework through two case studies (Section 4): COVID-19 incidence

prediction (Section 4.1) and vessel movement pattern recognition (Section 4.2). Results are

evaluated and discussed in Section 6.

Additionally, we explore the use of lar ge language models (LLMs) as collaborative agents

in this process (Section 5). Our experiments show that LLMs can acquire domain knowl-

edge through interactive prompting and apply it to generate realistic, constraint-respecting

synthetic data. In Section 6.2.2, we discuss the potential for extending this capability to

enhance explanations generated by algorithmic XAI methods. Section 7 concludes the paper

and outlines directions for future research.

1 3

250 Page 2 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

2 Related work

W e review related work in three interconnected areas: incorporating expert knowledge into

ML models, integrating prior knowledge in explanations, and interactive ML as a founda-

tion for human-AI collaboration.

2.1 Incorporating expert knowledge in ML development

Informed machine learning (von Rueden et al., 2023; Karpatne et al., 2017) aims to inte-

grate prior knowledge into model training through formalized structures such as logic rules

or physical equations. Knowledge graphs (KGs) have emerged as a powerful approach to

embed structured domain knowledge into machine learning workows. By representing

entities, relations, and domain constraints, KGs can improve model interpretability and sup-

port tasks such as feature extraction, concept inference, and information retrieval, making

them particularly relevant in explainable AI systems (Rajabi & Etminani, 2024). However,

most KG-based approaches assume that such a graph is already available. In many practical

domains, this is not the case. Creating a KG from scratch requires the elicitation of expert

knowledge, followed by formalization into machine-interpretable structures. This process

typically demands signicant eort from skilled knowledge engineers (Kidd, 1987). As past

experiences with development of expert systems (Buchanan et al., 2006) have shown, this

bottleneck often limits the deployment of knowledge-intensive AI systems in practice.

Instead of requiring formal knowledge engineering beforehand, we propose a human-in-

the-loop workow in which domain experts directly shape and test their knowledge through

feature engineering. W e support this process with interactive visual analytics tools that help

experts formulate meaningful features, inspect their impact on model behaviour, and itera-

tively rene their representations. In this way, we lower the barrier to incorporating expert

knowledge into the machine learning pipeline without requiring formal ontology design or

structured knowledge encoding.

Visual analytics oers a range of tools for knowledge-driven data structuring. Existing

V A systems have demonstrated the value of expert interaction in model development work-

ows, for instance, via interactive feature selection, hyperparameter tuning, or comparative

model assessment (Sacha et al., 2019; Endert et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2017; Wang et al.,

2024). However, most focus on supporting user feedback rather than capturing tacit domain

expertise for downstream explainability. Earlier work on conceptual model development

through V A (Giabbanelli & Jackson, 2015; Zhao et al., 2018) shares our goal of knowledge

externalization but lacks direct connections to ML contexts.

Our work builds on these foundations by enabling experts to encode domain semantics

through data representations and by evaluating model behaviour iteratively, thereby prepar-

ing a basis for human-aligned explanations without altering the learning process itself.

2.2 Incorporating domain knowledge into XAI methods

A wide range of local explainable AI (XAI) techniques have been developed. Widely used

are feature attribution methods, such as LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) and SHAP (Lundberg

& Lee, 2017), which quantify the contribution of each feature to a specic prediction. How-

ever, feature attribution scores are limited in their ability to convey semantic structure or

1 3

Page 3 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

domain-relevant logic. A list of feature weights does not tell the user how features interact

or why a prediction was made.

In contrast, explanation methods based on rules or decision trees, such as ANCHOR

(Ribeiro et al., 2018) and LORE (Guidotti et al., 2019a), oer richer semantics through

IF-THEN statements that express local decision logic. These structures better align with

how humans conceptualize categories. ANCHOR produces high-precision rules focused on

suciency conditions, but often omits broader feature context, making its explanations

potentially brittle. LORE learns a local surrogate decision tree that captures both primary

and alternative outcomes by generating a synthetic neighbourhood through controlled

perturbation.

Although widely used for their model-agnostic nature, such post-hoc methods often over-

look domain-specic feature relationships, resulting in implausible or misleading explana-

tions. W e address this by constraining the perturbation process using domain-aware instance

generators, thereby improving plausibility without modifying the XAI method itself. W e

build on LORE due to its extensible architecture, which supports externally dened neigh-

bourhood generation, which is an essential capability for integrating domain knowledge into

explanation.

Domain knowledge could, in principle, also be integrated into the rule extraction process

of ANCHOR by enforcing such constraints during the growth of explanation rules. However,

this would likely require a substantial re-implementation of the algorithm, along with opti-

mizations to its rule induction mechanism. Similarly to LORE, LIME could also benet from

a custom neighbourhood generation process that integrates domain knowledge. However,

implementing such functionality would require extending or re-engineering the library, as

its current design does not natively support this level of customization.

In addition to improving the generation of explanations, we also focus on how they are

presented and validated by users. V isual analytics (V A) supports this by enabling interactive

exploration of explanation structures and helping users relate model behaviour to domain

knowledge. For example, systems like RuleMatrix (Ming et al., 2019) and explAIner (Spin-

ner et al., 2020) allow users to inspect and manipulate explanation rules, while others facili-

tate exploration of instance clusters, latent spaces (Hohman et al., 2019), and model errors

(Cheng et al., 2021). V A enhances cognitive alignment by contextualizing explanations and

supporting iterative renement, making it a natural complement to rule-based explanation

methods.

2.3 Interactive machine learning and human-AI alignment

Our methodology aligns with principles of explanatory interactive machine learning (IML),

where human input is integrated iteratively not only during training but also during explana-

tion renement. Teso and Kersting ( 2019) formalize this approach, showing how explana-

tory feedback can guide models toward more interpretable behaviour. Bhattacharya et al.

( 2024) extend this line of work by combining multifaceted explanations and data trans-

formations within interactive V A environments closely matching our dual-loop interaction

pattern.

Moreover, Schramowski et al. ( 2020) demonstrate that expert feedback on explanations

can steer models away from spurious correlations, reinforcing the importance of incorporat-

ing domain knowledge during both training and explanation. These studies empirically vali-

1 3

250 Page 4 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

date the broader intuition behind our approach: explanation is not just a post-hoc step but

part of an iterative human-AI dialogue. Our framework applies the principles of explanatory

IML while preserving the modularity of standard ML and XAI pipelines.

Table 1 summarizes the related work and highlights the specic limitations our approach

addresses.

3 Methods

Figure 1 illustrates the proposed pipeline for integration of human expert knowledge in

ML and XAI: (1) during the ML process, domain knowledge is used to prepare appropriate

training data and rene the model; (2) in the explanation phase, this knowledge is further

leveraged to ensure explanations align with user perspectives.

3.1 Incorporating human knowledge in models

As stated earlier, we propose a human-in-the-loop workow where domain experts incorpo-

rate their knowledge into ML through feature engineering, supported by interactive interfaces

and visual representations. While feature engineering is a standard part of ML workows

Fig. 1 Integrating human

expertise into the ML pipeline.

Knowledge is embedded through

data structuring and realistic

neighbourhood generation, sup-

porting model interpretability

and explanation plausibility

Approach Focus Limitations ad-

dressed by our work

Informed ML von Rueden

et al., ( 2023)

Formal knowl-

edge integration

Requires structured

prior knowledge

V A for ML Sacha et al.,

( 2019); Endert et al.,

( 2017)

Interactive model

renement

Limited support

for knowledge

encoding

XAI methods (e.g., LIME,

SHAP, ANCHOR)

Instance-level

explanations

Synthetic data may

violate domain

constraints

LORE Guidotti et al.,

( 2019a)

Rule-based local

modeling

Lacks expert-driven

neighborhood

control

Explanatory IML T eso &

Kersting, ( 2019); Bhat-

tacharya et al., ( 2024)

Iterative explana-

tion renement

Our work applies

this in model-

agnostic, V A-driven

settings

Table 1 Comparison of related

approaches to our framework

1 3

Page 5 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

(Dong & Liu, 2018), our contribution lies in oering UI components and visualization tech-

niques that enable experts to (a) apply and manage domain-informed data transformations,

(b) assess the representational adequacy of engineered features for the modelling task, and

(c) explore and compare model outputs across iterations to identify and address perfor-

mance issues. The framework is organized around a set of modular operations:

Step 1: Data abstraction – dening analytical units

Raw data often consist of elementary observations tied to individual objects, timestamps,

or locations. The rst step is to dene higher-level units of analysis suitable for the model-

ling task, e.g., grouping time points into intervals, spatial points into regions, or individuals

into groups. The framework provides interactive interfaces to congure such aggregations

and view their eects on the data distribution (see, for example, Andrienko et al. ( 2016,

2023)).

Step 2: Context encoding

Many predictive tasks depend not only on the internal properties of a unit but also on the

context in which the unit occurs. Experts can dene context windows, e.g., preceding time

intervals, neighbouring regions, or connected nodes of a network, and derive features that

summarise relevant surrounding conditions. Our tools support this through parametrised

transformations and visual representations allowing users to inspect the relevance and infor-

mativeness of contextual features (e.g., Peng et al. ( 2025)).

Step 3: Synoptic feature construction

To capture the internal structure or dynamics of a unit, the system provides functions

for computing statistical summaries, trends, variation measures, or custom aggregates. For

example, experts can summarise speed variations over a time interval or density distribu-

tions within a region. V isualisations help users to verify whether the derived features align

with domain-relevant behaviour patterns (e.g., Andrienko et al. ( 2024)).

Step 4: Iterative model renement

After model training, experts can compare predictions across model versions using side-

by-side views and performance overlays. This feedback loop allows users to detect where

features are insucient or misleading, and return to previous steps to rene transformations

or add new features.

This iterative process allows domain knowledge to shape the model indirectly through

improved data representation. Rather than encoding knowledge explicitly in rules or ontolo-

gies, experts interactively rene how data are structured, contextualised, and summarised

to better capture relevant behaviour patterns. Our framework supports this process through

interfaces drsigned for expert-guided data transformation and responsive visual feedback.

Many of these tools have been introduced in our prior work. Some papers are cited above,

but a comprehensive overview is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, we focus on two

case studies where temporal abstraction was used to craft meaningful features for interpre-

table model development.

3.2 Incorporating human knowledge in explanations

In our work, we focus on generating local explanations telling how a model obtains a spe-

cic prediction for a given instance. W e build on the rule-based explanation method LORE

(LOcal Rule-based Explanation) (Guidotti et al., 2019a), which approximates the model's

1 3

250 Page 6 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

decision boundary in the local neighbourhood of the instance via a transparent surrogate

model. The explanation takes the form of logical rules:

(1) a factual rule, which identies the key factors leading to the prediction, and

(2) a set of counterfactual rules describing minimal changes in feature values that would

alter the prediction.

Both rule types are represented as logical conjunctions in the antecedent with a predicted

class as the consequent. Counterfactual rules are particularly aligned with human reasoning

styles, as they provide contrastive examples encouraging the users to explore alternative

scenarios that could arise by adjusting input features. Presentation of counterfactual rules

is widely recognised in human-centred XAI research (Miller, 2019; Riveiro & Thill, 2021).

Explanations are more eective when they reference concepts familiar to the user. By

relying on features engineered through expert-driven abstraction and contextualisation (see

Section 3.1), we expect that our explanations align closely with domain knowledge and thus

can be well understood by users.

Neighbourhood generation in LORE

To derive local rules, LORE generates a synthetic neighbourhood around the instance

of interest. These synthetic instances are created by perturbing feature values and then

querying the black-box model to obtain predictions. The resulting labelled instances serve

as training data for a transparent surrogate model (e.g., a decision tree), which learns to

approximate the black-box model's local decision boundary.

Neighbourhood generation in LORE uses a genetic algorithm with the following steps:

(1) Initialization: A seed population is formed by replicating the input instance x.

(2) Mutation and Crossover: At each generation, feature values are randomly modied

(mutation) or recombined from pairs of instances (crossover).

(3) Selection: Individuals with the highest tness are selected for the next generation. Fit-

ness is computed based on (a) feature similarity (closeness to x in input space) and (b)

target similarity (closeness in predicted class).

(4) Dual Objective Optimization: Two sub-populations are evolved separately:

●

Instances similar to x with the same predicted class.

●

Instances similar to x with a dierent class.

These sub-populations are merged to form the local training dataset for the surrogate

model. Incorporating human knowledge via constraints

To ensure that generated explanations are meaningful to domain experts, we extend LORE

with domain knowledge through neighbourhood constraints, guiding the synthetic data gen-

eration process:

●

Hard Constraints: Following the data abstraction and contextualization steps, the

synthetic instances need to adhere to the same structural properties. Hard constraints

represent these properties. Any synthetic instance violating these constraints (e.g., tem-

poral orderings) is discarded.

1 3

Page 7 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

●

Soft Constraints: These constraints serve as guidance for the generation process, pro-

viding weights and priorities for the features. For example, if a feature is considered

more important by the expert, it will be more likely to be altered in the synthetic in-

stances.

This constraint-driven extension allows the generated neighbourhood to better align with

the expert's mental model and domain expectations.

Alternative neighbourhood generators

To assess the eect of constraint-driven generation, we compare against two alternative

generators:

●

Random Generator: A baseline implemented in the LORE Python library that perturbs

features independently within their value ranges until the neighbourhood reaches the

desired size.

●

kNN Generator: A new baseline introduced by us, which selects the k nearest neigh-

bours from the original training set based on feature distance. This method does not

generate synthetic data but instead reuses existing instances. It is applicable only when

suitable labelled data (e.g., the model training data) are available.

4 Case studies

To evaluate the practical utility and generalizability of our proposed methodology, we con-

ducted two case studies in distinct domains: (1) prediction of COVID-19 incidence level

changes using temporal context features derived from prior disease trends and mobility

data, and (2) classication of vessel movement patterns based on trajectory features. The

case studies serve three primary purposes: (1) to demonstrate how expert knowledge can be

integrated into the ML pipeline through visual analytics-supported data preparation and syn-

thetic neighbourhood generation, (2) to assess the impact of knowledge-informed instance

generation on explanation quality, and (3) to reveal possible limitations of our approach.

Importantly, we conduct these investigations without modifying the core ML or XAI algo-

rithms, thereby revealing how much improvement can be achieved within existing frame-

works by embedding domain knowledge at the data and representation levels.

For both case studies, we employed Random Forest as our classication method due to

its robust performance characteristics and practical advantages. This ensemble technique

combines multiple decision trees to deliver high accuracy while eciently capturing com-

plex non-linear relationships and feature interactions. However, our framework is general

and can be applied with any ML method.

4.1 Case study 1: COVID-19 and population mobility in Spanish provinces

This case study uses data collected in Spain during the COVID-19 pandemic to predict

upcoming COVID-19 incidence levels based on trends in disease and population mobility in

preceding weeks. The dataset includes daily counts of COVID-19 cases and intra-provincial

mobility across 52 provinces over 64 weeks, derived from open sources (Ponce-de Leon et

al., 2021a, b, c, d).

1 3

250 Page 8 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

4.1.1 Incorporating domain knowledge in model development

Step 1: Data abstraction – dening analytical units

Raw daily time series were smoothed with a 7-day moving average to reduce noise and

weekly cyclicity. The smoothed data were segmented into weekly episodes, which were

categorized into four ordinal levels for COVID-19 severity (c1 to c4) and mobility (m1 to

m4). Consecutive episodes with the same level were grouped into events dened as coherent

intervals of high or low incidence or mobility (Fig. 2).

Step 2: Context encoding

Each COVID-19 event was assigned a temporal context dened by the COVID-19 and

mobility levels over the six preceding weeks. This window length was chosen based on epi-

demiological reasoning: the eects of mobility changes on disease incidence typically man-

ifest with a delay of about three weeks, corresponding to the incubation period and reporting

lag. An additional three weeks were included to capture trends and make directional changes

in incidence or mobility more detectable. The resulting context encodes short-term temporal

dynamics relevant for predicting the severity of upcoming COVID-19 events (Fig. 3).

Step 3: Synoptic feature construction

The context window was converted into 12 categorical features (6 weeks

×

2 variables),

describing the sequence of COVID-19 and mobility levels. An additional continuous fea-

ture, “days since pandemic onset”, was added to account for broader temporal eects.

Step 4: Iterative model renement

A random forest classier was trained to predict the level (c1–c4) of each COVID-19

event from its context. Visual analytics was used to inspect model predictions, identify

temporal or regional misclassications, and guide renement. Through human-in-the-loop

iteration, we introduced targeted improvements:

●

Temporal and spatial decomposition (e.g., isolating early pandemic phases, separating

island provinces)

●

Filtering outliers and non-representative periods

●

Model comparison via visualization of misclassication patterns across time and prov-

inces (Fig. 4)

Fig. 2 Visualisation of weekly episodes derived from time series of COVID-19 incidence and popula-

tion mobility in provinces of Spain. The horizontal dimension represents time, the rows correspond to

the provinces, and the cells represent the episodes coloured by the levels of disease incidence (left, from

green for low to red for high) and mobility (right, from red for very low to blue for normal)

1 3

Page 9 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

This process allowed domain experts to iteratively inject knowledge into both data represen-

tation and model structure, improving both interpretability and performance beyond what

could be achieved with raw data and automatic learning alone.

4.1.2 Incorporating domain knowledge into neighbourhood generation

During the data preparation phase, we identied internal constraints and relationships within

our data that could not be captured by traditional neighbourhood generators. These included

time-related patterns and the prevalence of gradual rather than abrupt changes over time. W e

developed a customized neighbourhood generator designed to account for these dependen-

cies and constraints. Each event record comprises three sections: (1) attribute describing

Fig. 4 Comparison of dierent versions of the pandemic level model by visual inspection of the distribu-

tions of model errors over time (horizontal dimension) and provinces (vertical dimension). The events are

represented by horizontal bars with model errors encoded by the colours. Shades of blue and red signify,

respectively, under and over-estimation of the pandemic event level; the darkness is proportional to the

dierence between the predicted and actual levels

Fig. 3 Visual representation of temporal contexts of four selected examples of pandemic events from

dierent classes by disease incidence. The columns of the matrices correspond to the weeks from -6 to

-1 preceding the events. Each row corresponds to one level of either COVID-19 (top 4 rows) or mobility

(lower 4 rows). The lled cells signify which levels of COVID-19 and mobility were attained before the

events started. The colours of the lled rectangles reect the classes (levels) of the represented events

1 3

250 Page 10 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

temporal positioning, (2) epidemic severity classes for COVID-19, and (3) mobility inten-

sity classes. While the legacy neighbourhood generator used in LORE randomly selects fea-

ture values to perturb within a predened radius, we want to restrict this perturbation based

on the internal properties of our data, ensuring that feature values for COVID-19 and mobil-

ity remain consistent with domain-specic constraints. For example, abrupt transitions from

a low epidemic level to the maximum level are avoided, as are inconsistencies like abrupt

level drops in sequences of high-incidence epidemic classes. W ithin the LORE pipeline, this

neighbourhood generation step is where domain-specic rules can be incorporated.

W e dened a set of soft constraints to guide the perturbation process, ensuring that gen-

erated data remain realistic and domain-consistent. Our approach is based on the observa-

tion that COVID-19 and mobility levels from previous weeks strongly inuence subsequent

levels. For instance, a high epidemic level is more likely to persist or transition to another

high level in the following week. T o capture these dependencies, we modelled transitions

using probability distributions derived from training data. These transitions are encoded in a

transition matrix that governs how feature values change over time. Specically, we dene

a

5 × 5

matrix A, where each element

a i,j

represents the probability of transitioning from

state

s i

to state

s j

. Figure 5 illustrates examples of these matrices for COVID-19 and mobil-

ity features, highlighting dierences in transition patterns. Bipartite graphs further visualize

weighted transition probabilities, oering an intuitive representation of these relationships.

W e exclude class 0 (missing or undened values) to ensure valid record generation.

To estimate the transition probabilities, we trained a Bayesian network on the real-world

data. This network models dependencies between consecutive weeks as a directed graph,

where each state inuences the next (e.g.,

P( week n=

s

l| week n− 1=

s

k)

, with l and k

representing COVID-19 or mobility levels). Conditional probabilities were averaged across

weeks to obtain stable transition probabilities for each level pair. The resulting transition

matrices serve as the basis for perturbations, preserving domain knowledge and generating

consistent neighbourhoods.

This approach is computationally ecient: since transitions rely on precomputed prob-

abilities stored in index-based data structures, perturbation lookup operates in constant time,

regardless of the number of generated instances. This ensures that the method integrates

seamlessly with the legacy algorithm without increasing its computational complexity. The

quality of the generated neighbourhoods is evaluated in Section 6.

Fig. 5 On the left: The COVID-19 and Mobility transition matrices used as constraints to generate

neighbourhoods. On the right: Bipartite graphs with the probabilities for COVID-19 (Left) and Mobil-

ity (Right) state transitions. The thickness of each arc is proportional to the probability of the transition

1 3

Page 11 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

4.2 Case study 2: vessel movement pattern recognition

This case study addresses the classication of short vessel trajectory segments into six types

of movement behaviour: 1 - straight movement, 2 - curved movement, 3 - trawling, 4 -

port-connected (entering or exiting a port), 5 - near port (manoeuvring near a port), and

6 - anchored. The dataset comprises trajectories of 71 shing vessels operating north-west

of France between October 1, 2015, and March 31, 2016, sourced from an openly available

repository 1. The six movement types are illustrated in Fig. 6.

4.2.1 Incorporating domain knowledge in model development

Step 1: Data abstraction – dening analytical units

The raw vessel trajectories were segmented into overlapping 3-hour episodes with a

1-hour shift between consecutive segments. This window length balances temporal context

and segment resolution: three hours is typically sucient to capture operational patterns

such as trawling or anchoring. Overlaps ensure that important patterns are not lost at seg-

ment boundaries, enabling better continuity and behavioural interpretation. Each episode

becomes a single data instance for subsequent classication.

Step 2: Context encoding

The key contextual factor in this domain is proximity to port, as it strongly inuences

vessel behaviour. T o incorporate this context, the minimum and maximum distance from the

nearest port were computed for each episode using an external dataset of port coordinates.

1 https://zenodo.org/records/1167595

Fig. 6 V isually supported preparation of data for recognition of vessel movement patterns. Upper row,

from left to right: 1) UMAP projection of episodes based on the generated features; 2) complete original

trajectories; 3) episodes of straight movement; 4) episodes of curved movement. Lower row, from left to

right: 5) trawling; 6) port-connected; 7) near port; 8) anchored

1 3

250 Page 12 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

These two features – Log10MinDistPort (log-transformed) and MaxDistPort – cap-

ture whether the vessel is performing port-related manoeuvres or operating farther oshore.

Step 3: Synoptic feature construction

W e generated 7 synoptic features characterising the vessel movement during the lifetime

of each episode. They summarize speed distribution, movement direction, and trajectory

complexity:

●

SpeedMinimum, SpeedQ1, SpeedMedian, SpeedQ3: Statistics of speed

smoothed over a 5-minute window, representing the distribution from minimum to up-

per quartile.

●

Log10Curvature: Logarithm of the curvature of the vessel's distance-from-start

time series, computed as the ratio between the sum of absolute consecutive changes

and the amplitude of values. A value close to 1 indicates straight-line movement; higher

values indicate loops or turns.

●

DistStartTrendAngle: Angle of the tted linear trend to the distance-from-start

time series, capturing the directional tendency of movement away from the starting

point.

●

Log10DistStartTrendDevAmplitude: Logarithm of the amplitude of devia-

tions from the tted trend line, quantifying local path tortuosity or zigzagging.

Logarithmic transformations were applied to features with skewed distributions (namely

curvature, deviation amplitude, and minimum port distance) to improve separability and

model performance.

Log10Curvature and Log10DistStartTrendDevAmplitude jointly describe

the shape complexity of a movement episode: the former reects global movement geom-

etry, while the latter captures local irregularities. Together, they support ne-grained dis-

crimination between behaviours such as steady outward navigation, trawling, and in-place

manoeuvring.

Feature eectiveness was evaluated using dimensionality reduction (UMAP; see Fig. 6,

top left), which revealed distinct clusters of movement patterns. These clusters were exam-

ined through interactive map-based visualization, and representative episodes were labelled

by domain experts.

Step 4: Iterative model renement

The process of feature design and evaluation was iterative: a k-nearest neighbours (kNN)

classier was used as a rapid probe to assess the discriminative power of evolving feature

sets. When results were inconclusive, new features were designed or rened to enhance

behavioural distinction. After achieving good results with kNN, a random forest classier

was trained using 5-fold cross-validation with a xed random seed (0) to ensure reproduc-

ibility. The nal model achieved 98% accuracy, conrming that the constructed synoptic

and contextual features were sucient to accurately distinguish movement patterns without

additional post-hoc tuning.

The process of dening movement episodes and feature engineering in this case study is

described in more detail in our earlier publication (Andrienko et al., 2024).

1 3

Page 13 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

4.2.2 Incorporating domain knowledge into neighbourhood generation

Following the feature engineering described in the previous section, we dene two sets of

constraints to guide the neighbourhood generation process:

●

Hard Constraints: the speed features should be consistent with the internal dependen-

cies. We discard or correct those instances that do not satisfy these internal consisten-

cies.

●

Soft Constraints: W e introduce a preferential selection of features to be perturbed based

on their importance for each target class. DT-based generator

This generator designs a mechanism to select the features to be perturbed based on a set of

domain-specic relationships among the feature values. Since these relationships are too

complex to be expressed through a set of precise statements by the expert, we introduce a

method based on decision trees (DT) by leveraging the knowledge embedded in the train-

ing data. For each class c, we construct a DT to distinguish instances of this class from

all others. The training is performed on a modied version of the training dataset, where

instances belonging to class c are labelled as positive examples (1), while all others as

negative examples (0). The resulting tree serves as a representation of the relationships that

discriminate class c from the rest.

Given the forest of DTs, when an instance x is processed, it is rst classied by the

black box model. The predicted class determines the appropriate binary DT in the for-

est, which is then used to classify x and retrieve the decision rules along its classication

path. Figure 7 provides a schematic representation of this process. The features involved

in the decision path are prioritized for perturbation to generate the neighbourhood. In the

toy example shown in Fig. 7, the three attributes used by the tree are given a higher prob-

ability of being perturbed. This selective perturbation process is used to incorporate the

soft constraints into the perturbation process. The set of hard constraints ensures the

correct relationships between the values of the speed features, namely: SpeedMinimum

≤

SpeedQ1

≤

SpeedMedian

≤

SpeedQ3. Features not selected by the binary DT s can

still be perturbed with a lower probability. The computational cost of this selective perturba-

tion process remains comparable to the baseline random generator, with a slight one-time

overhead due to training the forest of DTs. The process involves a single classication by a

DT, followed by selective perturbation of the identied features.

Genetic optimization of DT-based generator

Fig. 7 Example of a forest of decision trees (DT) used to dene the probability of perturbation of relevant

features for an instance. Given an input instance x, classied as 'Class 1' (Left), the corresponding deci-

sion tree provides the features that contribute to its classication. These features, highlighted in red, are

then used to perturb x

1 3

250 Page 14 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

W e improved our DT-based generator using a genetic optimization process to improve

performance. While retaining the tness functions from LORE, we introduced custom muta-

tion and crossover operators. During the genetic optimization, the operation of mutation

and crossover are limited by the same set of hard constraints and soft constraints as the

DT-based generator. The genetic optimization improves the generation of opposite classes

and the quality of the generated neighbourhoods.

5 LLM-suppor ted generation of synthetic neighbours

Domain experts may struggle to incorporate their specialised knowledge into synthetic data

generation without support from skilled data engineers. We have investigated how lar ge

language models (LLMs) can bridge this gap by enabling non-technical domain experts

to collaboratively create, rene, and validate synthetic data generation methods. Through

this approach, LLMs serve as intelligent intermediaries that translate domain expertise into

actionable data generation processes, making synthetic data creation easier and more e-

cient for experts.

5.1 COVID-19 and mobility: an experiment with ChatGPT

W e conducted an experiment with using GPT-4 Turbo (ChatGPT-4o) for generating syn-

thetic neighbourhoods in a COVID-19 and mobility prediction task. Here we provide a brief

summary. A more detailed description is available in Appendix A.

Through an iterative dialogue with the LLM, we specied requirements for the genera-

tor, emphasizing the need for both randomness and domain consistency. The LLM produced

Python code that integrated key domain knowledge in the form of transition probabilities

between COVID-19 and mobility levels. After assessing the rst result, the LLM was fur-

ther requested to increase the diversity of the generated instances to ensure predictions to

cover all target classes.

The nal Python code was tested using 15 real input instances. For each, 100 synthetic

neighbours were generated. These were evaluated using the predictive model and visualised

using UMAP, which produced a 2D projection of the instances according to their similarity.

Visualisations revealed that synthetic neighbours clustered around their original instances

while also exhibiting sucient diversity to yield varied model predictions. This conrmed

the generator's ability to produce plausible and informative data variations.

The experiment was judged successful, showing the potential of LLMs to act as interac-

tive coding assistants for building data generators guided by expert knowledge. However,

some challenges were revealed. Translating informal domain insights into precise prompts

often required reformulation. The generated code needed validation and debugging. These

tasks demand coding skills, which domain experts may lack. Visual analytics proved helpful

for evaluating neighbourhood quality, but further tools are needed to assess the realism of

feature combinations more systematically.

1 3

Page 15 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

5.2 Vessel activities: an experiment with Google Gemini

For the vessel movement case study, we conducted an experiment using Google Gemini

version 2.5 Flash. Using a textual prompt describing domain-specic constraints and fea-

ture characteristics, the LLM generated a Python implementation with methods to produce

class-targeted, constraint-compliant synthetic neighbours. The generator integrates expert

knowledge into the perturbation process through the following mechanisms:

●

Feature-constrained perturbation: Feature values are perturbed within reasonable ranges

while preserving known structural relationships:

– Speed statistics ( SpeedMinimum, SpeedQ1, SpeedMedian, SpeedQ3) must

maintain ascending order and remain within the empirical upper bound (22.0 knots).

– Curvature-related features such as Log10Curvature, DistStartTrendA-

ngle, and Log10DistStartTrendDevAmplitude are constrained to lie

within historically observed ranges.

– A domain rule is enforced: high speed cannot co-occur with high curvature.

– Speed- and distance-related features are kept within valid, non-negative domains,

while Log10MinDistPort is kept above a known minimum of

− 3. 05

.

●

Class-tendency-guided generation: The generator strives to produce synthetic instances

biased toward each of the six behaviour classes. For example, instances simulating "an-

chored" behaviour are generated with very low speed and high curvature. This mecha-

nism supports counterfactual exploration and class separation analysis.

●

Balanced neighbourhood construction: For a given input instance, the generator pro-

duces a user-specied number of synthetic neighbours. It balances the output across all

six class tendencies, ensuring that the resulting neighbourhood exhibits class diversity.

A more detailed description, including evaluation of generated synthetic instances by means

of visual analytics techniques, is available in Appendix B.

This experiment again illustrates that LLMs can translate high-level expert instructions

into executable, constraint-aware code for synthetic data generation. Similar to the COVID-

19 case study, the generated neighbourhood supports downstream tasks such as explanation

generation and model testing. Both experiments demonstrate the high potential of LLMs

in supporting human-in-the-loop model testing and explanation by enabling domain-aware

synthetic data generation.

6 Evaluation and discussion

The evaluation of our proposed methodology is structured into two parts. First, we compare

the properties of synthetic neighborhoods generated by standard domain-agnostic methods

with those produced by our domain-informed approaches. The comparison is guided by

three key criteria: realism, locality, and diversity. Our primary research question in this part

is whether the incorporation of domain knowledge leads to the generation of higher-quality

synthetic data.

1 3

250 Page 16 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

In the second part of the evaluation, we assess the explanatory rules generated using

synthetic neighbourhoods created by dierent methods. Our initial hypothesis was that

higher-quality synthetic data would enable the derivation of more accurate, meaningful, and

trustworthy explanations. However, as we discuss later, this hypothesis was not conrmed.

The observed limitations point to more fundamental deciencies in current algorithmic XAI

techniques that derive explanations purely from data.

6.1 Evaluation of synthetic neighbourhoods

To evaluate the impact of the proposed methodology, we conducted comparative assess-

ments of the outcomes of dierent generators for the two use cases. The goal was to com-

pare each generator's performance in terms of alignment with the expert' s ground truth.

As a reference, we used the respective training data of both domains based on the intuition

that if the generated neighbourhoods aligned with expert knowledge, they should also align

with the training data distribution. Consequently, the derived explanation rules would be

consistent with both.

W e apply two methods of comparison. (1) Analytical comparison, where we used a

combination of measures to assess the locality, compactness, and plausibility of the pro-

duced instances.

(2) V isualization-based qualitative comparison of features, comparing for each neigh-

bourhood generator the marginal distribution of features of the synthetic instances with the

training data. This comparison has the goal to assess how much the generated instances

are consistent with the domain knowledge and how each generator is able to diversify the

feature values.

Analytical comparison

Neighbourhood generators are designed to produce a set of points as perturbation of a

given instance x, with two primary objectives: (i) ensuring that the generated points exhibit

realistic values, i.e., that they are likely to belong to the original training distribution; and

(ii) maintaining proximity between the generated instances and x.

To quantitatively assess the compactness criterion, we use the measure as dened in

Guidotti et al. ( 2019a), that we named instance distance, computed as the average distance

of all generated instances from the original instance x. Formally:

D

( x, N )=

1

|

N

| ∑

z

i ∈

N

d( x, z i)

,

where

d( x, z i)

is the distance between the original instance x and each generated instance

z i

in the neighbourhood N. In our implementation, we use the Euclidean distance for this

measure, although the choice of distance metric is congurable.

To evaluate the realism of the generated neighbourhoods, we use the Ener gy Distance

(Székely & Rizzo, 2013) and Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012),

which are commonly employed to compare distributions. The Energy Distance is a sta-

tistical metric that quanties the discrepancy between two probability distributions, while

MMD measures the distance between the means of two distributions in a reproducing kernel

Hilbert space. Both metrics provide insight into how well the generated neighbourhoods

resemble the training data distribution.

1 3

Page 17 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

W e compared the neighbourhoods produced by each generator to the training data distri-

bution. For each instance x, we generated a neighbourhood N of size

n= 2000

using each

generator. This process was repeated multiple times, and for each repetition and each gen-

erator, we computed the aforementioned metrics. In all cases, the tests consistently rejected

the null hypothesis that the distributions of the generated neighbourhoods and the training

data are the same ( p-value

< 0. 001

).

Table 2 summarizes the results of the analytical comparison for the Vessel case study.

Among the evaluated generators, the Custom and Custom Genetic generators achieved the

lowest instance distance, indicating that they are able to produce compact neighbourhoods

that are close to the original instance. The LLM generator also performed well, producing a

compact neighbourhood and the lowest divergence across the Energy and MMD measures,

indicating that it successfully captured the training data distribution. The Genetic, Custom

Genetic, and Custom generators have comparable distributions. The Random generator, as

expected, produced the largest instance distance, indicating that it generated data that is very

spread out. The Baseline generator, which simply extracts instances from the training data,

achieved the lowest Energy distance and it does not produce MMD, as the two distributions

are identical. In summary, the Custom and LLM generators yielded the best results, dem-

onstrating their ecacy in capturing internal data characteristics. This also demonstrates

that the constraints dened by the LLM were eective in producing a generator that match

the requirements of the domain. From a computational perspective, the LLM generator was

the most ecient. The Custom generator, while slightly slower, is the generator that best

balances performance and output quality. The Custom Genetic generator, while producing

the most compact neighbourhoods, was signicantly slower due to the genetic optimization

process.

Table 3 summarizes the results of the analytical comparison for the COVID-19 and

mobility case study. Since the majority of the features of this dataset are categorical, poten-

tial perturbations are limited. This generates a similar performance across all generators,

in particular for the Instance distance measure. Given the limited variability of the fea-

ture space there is no a clear winning generator. For this reason, the analytical comparison

provides only a partial view of the performance of the generators. In the next section, we

complement this analysis with a qualitative comparison of the feature distributions of the

generated neighbourhoods.

Visualization-based qualitative comparison of feature distributions

To better understand the quality of the generated neighbourhoods, we conducted a quali-

tative comparison of the feature distributions of the synthetic instances produced by each

generator. W e implemented a visual-based dashboard that provides a comprehensive over-

view of the generated neighbourhoods. For each feature and for each generator, we display

Table 2 Vessel movements: Comparison of neighborhood methods across Instance distance, Energy, MMD,

and Time (mean ± standard deviation)

Generator Instance distance Energy MMD Time (s)

Random

1400 ± 12. 0031

8990 ± 13. 7530

0178 ± 0. 0014

0358 ± 0. 0042

Baseline

6637 ± 4. 8497

0910 ± 0. 0000

N/A

0024 ± 0. 0001

Custom

2196 ± 0. 2118

5748 ± 0. 0430

0399 ± 0. 0004

5345 ± 0. 1702

Genetic

0275 ± 4. 0885

9352 ± 0. 1566

0575 ± 0. 0009

4913 ± 0. 2668

Custom genetic

2714 ± 0. 9461

0236 ± 0. 6921

0587 ± 0. 0053

7897 ± 0. 7902

LLM

9267 ± 1. 5013

1266 ± 0. 0198

0083 ± 0. 0002

0500 ± 0. 0021

1 3

250 Page 18 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

a row of histograms with the marginal distribution of the feature values. This allows us to

visually assess how well the generators are capable of capturing the internal structure of

the domain. All the distributions are directly compared with the training data distribution,

which serves as a reference for the expected feature values.

The visualization starts from an instance x. For example the charts in Figure 8 show the

distributions of the features for a specic instance of the T rawling class from the V essel data-

set. The instance has the following feature values: SpeedMinimum=0.91, SpeedQ1=2.37,

SpeedMedian=2.49, SpeedQ3=2.78, Log10DistanceStartShapeCurvature=0.39, Distan-

ceStartTr endAngle=-0.01, LogDistStartTr endDevAmplitude=0.70, MaxDistPort=27.55,

LogMinDistPort=1.30.

The columns on the right show the distribution of the training data. However, the genera-

tors aim to produce local instances. Thus, it is important to consider the distribution of the

Baseline generator, which contains elements of the original training data restricted to the

local neighbourhood of the instance x.

W e observe that the Random generator produces a distribution very dierent from the

training data, as it samples randomly from the entire feature space. In contrast, all other

generators produce instances that remain closer to the training data distribution. Starting

from the distribution of classes in each neighbourhood, we can observe that the Random

generator produces instances across all possible classes. The Custom, Genetic, and Custom

Genetic generators focus on a limited number of classes near x. The LLM generator pro-

duces a broader distribution of classes, designed to diversify the neighbourhoods.

The speed-related features ( SpeedMinimum, SpeedQ1, SpeedMedian, and SpeedQ3)

show that customized generators reproduce internal relationships and constraints eec-

tively. The Custom, Genetic, and Custom Genetic generators generate narrow value ranges,

whereas the LLM generator produces distributions closer to the training data.

Similarly, for shape-based features ( Log10DistanceStartShapeCurvatur e, DistanceStart-

Tr endAngle, and LogDistStartTr endDevAmplitude), the LLM generator mimics the local

distribution of the Baseline data eectively. For port proximity features ( MaxDistPort and

LogMinDistPort), the Custom, Custom Genetic, and Genetic generators focus on the local

neighbourhood of x, while the LLM generator explores a wider feature space.

Figure 9 shows the dashboard for the COVID-19 and mobility case study. The instance

x used to generate the neighbourhoods has the following feature values: week6_covid=c3,

week5_covid=c3, week4_covid=c3, week3_covid=c3, week2_covid=c2, week6_mobility=c4,

week5_mobility=c3, week4_mobility=c4, week3_mobility=c4, week2_mobility=c3, week1_

mobility=c4, week_passed=63. The Random generator produces instances with feature

Table 3 COVID-19 and mobility

Generator Instance distance Energy MMD Time

Random

2837 ± 0. 1386

3761 ± 0. 0375

0052 ± 0. 0003

3078 ± 0. 0400

Baseline

2837 ± 0. 1386

0000 ± 0. 0000

N/A

0002 ± 0. 0000

Custom

5898 ± 0. 0760

7483 ± 0. 0187

0203 ± 0. 0003

0482 ± 0. 0039

Genetic

7421 ± 0. 0567

2248 ± 0. 0500

0336 ± 0. 0005

2679 ± 0. 3779

Custom

genetic

8902 ± 0. 0929

3411 ± 0. 0647

0391 ± 0. 0004

5833 ± 1. 0018

GPT

4904 ± 0. 0657

0216 ± 0. 0204

0253 ± 0. 0004

4225 ± 0. 0440

Compar ison of generat or varia nts across I nstanc e distanc e, Energy, MMD, a nd Time (mean ± sta ndard

deviation)

1 3

Page 19 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

values uniformly distributed across the entire feature space, resulting in a set of data distri-

butions that do not align with the training data. In contrast, the Custom and GPT generators

produce instances that are very close to each other, reecting the constraints imposed by

the domain knowledge. They are characterize by a narrow range of feature values. The two

Fig. 8 A visual dashboard for the comparison and exploration of neighbourhoods generated around an

instance x for the vessels dataset

1 3

250 Page 20 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

Fig. 9 A visual dashboard for the comparison and exploration of neighbourhoods generated around an

instance x for the COVID dataset

1 3

Page 21 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

generators based on genetic optimization ( Genetic and Custom Genetic) produce instances

whose feature values are even more narrowly distributed. Given the size of the neighbor-

hoods, the Baseline generator is limited in the number of instances available in the training

data, thus producing a smaller number of instances.

In summary, the analytical comparison conrms that the domain-informed genera-

tors outperform standard methods in terms of locality and compactness. The measures of

instance distance, Energy, and MMD indicate that the domain-informed generators produce

neighbourhoods that are closer to the original instance and more aligned with the training

data distribution. The qualitative comparison through visualizations further supports these

ndings, showing that the domain-informed generators produce instances that are more

realistic and diverse, while also preserving the internal structure of the domain. The custom-

ized generators and those based on LLMs balance performance and output quality.

6.2 Evaluation of the rules

To assess the eectiveness of dierent synthetic neighbourhood generators for producing

interpretable explanations, we extracted factual and counterfactual rules using several meth-

ods and displayed them side-by-side for expert evaluation. The rules were presented in a tex-

tual format to allow for direct comparison of their structure, complexity, and interpretability.

Figure 10 shows example rule sets for a specic instance from the vessel movement data-

set (previously shown in Figure 8). The rule sets, each generated using a dierent method,

reveal several insights:

●

The Baseline T raining generator, which samples from the training dataset, often produc-

es verbose rules with many predicates. This is likely due to the inclusion of non-local

instances in large neighbourhoods, causing the local surrogate to resemble the global

model and weakening its local explanatory power.

●

The Custom generator yields more concise rules by restricting perturbations based on

expert-dened constraints. The surrogate model, inuenced by a forest of decision

trees, favours features that are semantically meaningful and better aligned with domain

knowledge.

●

The Genetic Custom generator behaves similarly to the Custom generator but introduces

more diverse counterfactuals. The use of genetic optimization allows the search to ex-

plore a broader portion of the feature space while maintaining constraints.

●

The Genetic generator, though unconstrained, occasionally produces compact rules re-

sembling those from the Custom generator, but lacks domain grounding.

Figure 11 shows the rules extracted for the COVID-19 case study. As in the vessel example,

the Custom and GPT generators produce the most concise and semantically focused rules.

This conciseness results directly from the domain constraints embedded in the instance gen-

eration process. In contrast, the generic generators tend to yield rules with longer predicate

lists and limited interpretability.

1 3

250 Page 22 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

6.2.1 Limitations of current rule-based XAI methods

Despite these observations, our study ultimately reveals a fundamental limitation: the over-

all quality of the extracted rules across all generators is often inadequate for interpretability.

For example, a rule such as: “if week2_covid

=

c3 and week6_covid

=

c4 then class_

label = c3” fails to oer an exhaustive explanation of the model' s behaviour involving

all the relevant features. The logical link between the premises and conclusion may not be

aligned with human reasoning about temporal dynamics or causality in epidemiological

data.

This issue likely stems from how rule-based XAI methods like LORE operate. These

methods assume independence among features and aim to identify minimal discriminative

predicates to separate classes locally. As a result, they prioritise compactness over semantic

coherence and are unable to leverage the complex interdependencies embedded in synthetic

instances created by domain-informed generators.

As a further investigation, we computed the statistics of the decision trees used to extract

the rules. Table 4 summarizes some of the key structural characteristics of the decision trees

generated by each method when generating the explanations for the vessel movement data-

set presented in Fig. 10. We can observe that the Baseline and Random generators produce

more complex trees, with a larger depth and diameter. The Genetic generator also produces

a tree with a complex structure. The two customized models ( Custom and LLM) produce

Fig. 10 Comparison of factual and counterfactual rules extracted from dierent generators for the V essels

model. The class labels correspond to: 1 - Straight, 2 - Curved, 3 - Trawling, 4 - Port-Connected, 5 - Near

Port, 6 - Anchored

1 3

Page 23 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

more compact tree. This is reected also in the complexity of the rules extracted for expla-

nations. The Custom_Genetic generator combines the benets of the Custom generator and

the optimization of the Genetic generator.

Table 5 presents the statistics of the decision trees used to extract the rules for the

COVID-19 case study presented in Fig. 11. In this case, we observe a similar pattern as

in the previous case study. The Baseline and Random generators produce more complex

trees, while the customized generators yield trees with a more compact structure. On one

side, the compactness of the surrogate models is benecial for interpretability, as it leads to

simpler rules that may be easier to perceive. On the other side, the use of a small number of

features may limit the ability of the surrogate model to capture the complexity of the domain

relationships.

Table 4 Comparison of decision tree statistics across the geneators for the vessel movement dataset. Leaf

depth is reported as mean ± standard deviation

Tree # Leaves Max depth Leaf depth Diameter # Features used

Random 153 17

09 ± 2. 99

34 9

Baseline 59 14

25 ± 2. 72

19 9

Custom 3 2

67 ± 0. 47

3 2

Genetic 39 11

79 ± 2. 29

15 9

Custom genetic 6 4

00 ± 1. 00

5 4

LLM 5 3

40 ± 0. 49

5 3

Explanations

rando

m

Rule

IF

Week2_Covid !=

c3

Week2_Covid !=

c1

Week2_Covid =

c2

Days_passed >

440.43

Week3_Covid !=

c4

Week5_Covid !=

c4

Week3_Mobility !=

m1

Week5_Mobility !=

m1

Week5_Mobility =

m3

THEN

Class_label = c2

Counterrules

custom

Rule

IF

Week2_Covid !=

c3

Days_passed >

416.50

Week1_Mobility =

m4

Week6_Mobility !=

m1

Week3_Covid !=

c2

Week6_Mobility !=

m2

Week2_Covid !=

c4

Week3_Mobility !=

m3

THEN

Class_label = c2

Counterrules

IF

Week2_Covid !=

genetic

Rule

IF

Days_passed >

412.65

Week2_Covid !=

c3

Week2_Covid !=

c4

Week1_Mobility =

m4

Week6_Mobility =

m4

Week4_Covid !=

c1

Week6_Covid !=

c4

Week5_Covid !=

c1

THEN

Class_label = c2

Counterrules

IF

Days_passed >

custom_genetic

Rule

IF

Week2_Covid != c4

Days_passed >

430.50

Week2_Covid != c3

Week1_Mobility = m4

Week3_Mobility != m2

Week6_Mobility != m1

THEN

Class_label = c2

Counterrules

IF

Week2_Covid != c4

Days_passed >

437.50

Week2_Covid != c3

Week1_Mobility != m4

Week3_Mobility != m4

THEN

Class_label = c3

gpt

Rule

IF

We ek2_Covid !=

c3

We ek5_Covid !=

c4

We ek1_Mobility =

m4

We ek6_Mobility !=

m1

Days_passed >

423.50

We ek3_Covid !=

c2

We ek3_Mobility !=

m3

We ek2_Covid !=

c4

We ek6_Mobility !=

m2

We ek6_Covid !=

c4

THEN

Class_label = c2

baseline

Rule

IF

We ek2_Covid !=

c3

Days_passed >

395.50

We ek2_Covid !=

c1

We ek3_Covid =

c3

We

ek3_Mobility !=

m3

THEN

Class_label = c2

Counterrules

IF

We ek2_Covid !=

c3

Days_passed >

395.50

We ek2_Covid !=

c1

We ek3_Covid !=

Fig. 11 Comparison between factual and counterfactual rules extracted from dierent generators for the

COVID-19 model. The labels c1–c4 represent the scale from the lowest to the highest level of COVID-19

incidence

1 3

250 Page 24 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

W e conclude that current instance-based explanation methods are limited by their purely

data-driven nature. While they may be eective for binary decisions in domains with low

feature complexity (e.g., credit approval), they fall short when applied to temporally struc-

tured or semantically rich domains such as the ones studied here.

Rather than viewing this as a shortcoming of our approach, we frame it as an important

nding: embedding domain knowledge into synthetic data generation is a necessary

but insucient condition for producing human-aligned explanations. The gap lies in

the explanation algorithms themselves, which must evolve to reect domain structure and

inter-feature relationships more explicitly.

6.2.2 To ward LLM-enhanced explanation generation

Given the limitations of current rule-based XAI methods, we see promising opportunities

for incorporating LLMs into the explanation process. Our experiments demonstrated that

LLMs are capable of acquiring and operationalising domain knowledge through iterative

interactions with human experts. This capability suggests that LLMs could serve not only

as tools for generating synthetic data but also as intelligent agents for producing or rening

explanations that are aligned with expert understanding.

A promising direction is the integration of LLMs with outputs from algorithmic XAI

methods such as LORE or SHAP. Rather than replacing these methods, LLMs could inter-

pret, validate, and enrich the explanations by combining model outputs with previously

learned domain knowledge. For example, an LLM could take a rule or feature attribution

generated by an XAI algorithm and augment it with additional context, constraints, or

causal relationships derived from earlier conversations with a domain expert. This hybrid

reasoning process could transform low-level, data-driven outputs into more coherent and

cognitively aligned justications.

In this way, LLMs oer the potential to bridge the gap between statistical patterns iden-

tied by models and the structured, semantically meaningful knowledge used by human

decision-makers.

In light of our ndings, we return to the central question posed in the introduction:

how can domain knowledge be incorporated into both model development and explana-

tion generation without modifying existing ML or XAI algorithms? Our work demonstrates

that while knowledge-aware data preparation and neighbourhood generation signicantly

improve the realism and interpretability of inputs, current XAI methods often fall short in

extracting meaningful, human-aligned explanations. This gap suggests that LLMs, given

Table 5 Comparison of decision tree statistics across the generators for the COVID-19 and mobility dataset

Tree #Leaves Max Depth Leaf Depth Diameter #Features Used

Random 136 15

54 ± 2. 63

28 9

Baseline 60 13

20 ± 2. 76

18 9

Custom 2 1

00 ± 0. 00

2 1

Genetic 36 12

97 ± 2. 80

16 8

Custom genetic 3 2

67 ± 0. 47

3 2

GPT 5 3

40 ± 0. 49

5 3

Leaf dep th is repor ted as mea n ± standa rd deviatio n

1 3

Page 25 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

their ability to absorb and reuse domain knowledge acquired through expert interaction,

may serve as the critical missing layer.

7 Conclusion and future work

In this work, we proposed a methodology for integrating human knowledge into machine

learning (ML) workows to enhance both model interpretability and performance. By incor-

porating expert insight through visual analytics and domain-driven data transformations, we

enabled more semantically meaningful representations that align with expert reasoning. Our

dual approach targets two critical stages: the construction of interpretable models through

thoughtful data preparation and feature engineering, and the generation of explanation-sup-

porting synthetic neighborhoods that adhere to domain constraints.

W e validated our approach in two real-world case studies - predicting COVID-19

dynamics and identifying vessel movement patterns, demonstrating its applicability to dif-

ferent types of data. Through these case studies, we showed that domain-aware neighbour-

hood generation yields synthetic instances that better reect the structure of the real data

and expert expectations. Using quantitative and qualitative evaluation, we conrmed that

knowledge-guided instance generation produces neighbourhoods with improved locality,

realism, and diversity.

However, our ndings also reveal a critical limitation of current algorithmic explanation

techniques such as LORE. Despite improvements in neighbourhood quality, the generated

explanations often remain logically unconvincing or inconsistent with human reasoning.

This exposes a gap between domain-aware data generation and purely data-driven explana-

tion methods. W e ar gue that existing XAI frameworks lack the capacity to represent feature

interdependencies or temporal semantics required for meaningful explanations in complex

domains.

This limitation points to a new research direction: the integration of large language mod-

els (LLMs) not only in data generation but also in explanation generation. Our experiments

show that LLMs can understand and operationalise domain constraints; thus, they could be

further leveraged to rene or augment explanations produced by standard XAI methods.

By enabling semantically rich, context-aware justications, LLMs may help bridge the gap

between model logic and human mental models.

In future work, we aim to extend this methodology in several directions. First, scal-

ing the approach to higher-dimensional feature spaces while preserving interpretability is

essential for broader applicability. Second, exploring generative modelling techniques, such

as GANs or reinforcement learning, could further enhance the diversity and delity of syn-

thetic neighbourhoods. Third, longitudinal user studies could provide deeper insights into

how domain experts interact with and benet from knowledge-driven explanations. Finally,

hybrid systems integrating LLMs into the explanation pipeline open possibilities for rule

synthesis, feature relevance analysis, and interactive renement of models.

By addressing these directions, we aim to further strengthen the integration of human

knowledge into AI systems, advancing not only their accuracy and robustness but also their

transparency and alignment with human understanding.

1 3

250 Page 26 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

Appendix A: Using an LLM (ChatGPT) for synthetic neighbourhood

generation in the COVID-19 and mobility case study

W e performed this experiment using ChatGPT-4 Turbo (model GPT-4o) and focusing on

COVID-19 and mobility applications. We aimed to explore a scenario where a domain

expert communicates with an LLM, transferring relevant domain-specic knowledge. The

LLM creates and renes the code of a neighbourhood generator, demonstrates examples

of its outcomes, and incorporates expert feedback iteratively. This experiment sought to

answer the following questions: How realistic is this scenario? What challenges must be

addressed to make it eective?

Prompting the LLM

Initial prompt (omitting the data examples)

W e developed a machine learning model to predict future levels of pandemic incidence

(COVID-19) based on historical disease and mobility data. The dataset used for model-

ling covered daily counts of new COVID-19 cases and trips within 52 geographic regions,

normalized by population size. The data were aggregated into weekly intervals spanning

64 weeks from February 2020 to May 2021, excluding the rst six weeks due to signicant

dierences in pandemic patterns during the initial outbreak phase.

The aggregated data were discretized into four levels for disease incidence and four lev-

els for mobility, where lower levels of mobility indicated more severe restrictions, whereas

higher levels of disease incidence indicated higher disease spread. For each prediction, we

used a temporal context consisting of disease levels from weeks -6 to -2 and mobility levels

from weeks -6 to -1 relative to the target event, along with a temporal variable representing

the number of days since the pandemic began.

The modelling task focused on capturing the interdependencies between disease inci-

dence and mobility levels. Increases in disease incidence typically led to reduced mobility

through restrictions, which subsequently contributed to a delayed decline in disease levels.

Conversely, relaxed mobility restrictions often resulted in increased disease incidence after

a delay of one to three weeks.

To test the model' s robustness and explore its behavior under varying conditions, we

want to generate synthetic data instances in the neighbourhood of a given real data instance.

These synthetic instances should be created by perturbing the original feature values while

adhering to observed transition probabilities for both disease and mobility levels. The gen-

erated data should reect realistic temporal dynamics and interdependencies.

The goal of the synthetic data generation is to investigate how variations in input features

inuenced the model's predictions for the next level of pandemic incidence. By generating

a suciently diverse neighbourhood, we aim to ensure that the model produces predictions

across all possible levels of pandemic incidence, thereby enhancing the interpretability and

reliability of the predictions.

Renement

After assessing the rst result, the LLM was given the following request: “ Y ou need to

introduce some randomness in the generation, but keep consistency between the values of

the features according to the transition frequencies. The neighbourhood should be su-

ciently diverse to obtain at least 15 instances of each class after applying the model”.

1 3

Page 27 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

Domain Knowledge Involved in the Synthetic Neighbourhood Generator

Below is the LLM-generated description of the domain knowledge incorporated in the

neighbourhood generator. It demonstrates the degree of the LLM' s “understanding” of the

domain.

The synthetic neighbourhood generator incorporated the following domain knowledge to

ensure the generation of realistic and meaningful data instances:

●

Temporal Dynamics: The relationships between time-dependent variables, such as

COVID-19 levels and mobility levels, follow observable transition probabilities. These

transitions reect real-world temporal changes, e.g., how mobility levels shift over

weeks or how COVID-19 levels evolve. Transition frequencies for each variable were

constructed based on historical data, capturing the likelihood of transitions between

specic states.

●

Feature Interdependencies: Temporal features such as "Weeks_passed" and "Days_

passed" are interrelated, with consistent calculations ensuring the generated instances

remain plausible (e.g., "Days_passed" = "W eeks_passed"

×

7).

●

Realism in V ariations: V ariations in feature values (e.g., changes in past-week COV-

ID-19 and mobility levels) must align with the underlying transition frequencies. This

ensures that generated synthetic instances resemble realistic scenarios rather than ran-

dom deviations.

●

Diversity and Coverage: Generating synthetic neighbours involves balancing proximity

to the original instance with sucient diversity to explore less common but plausible

scenarios, thereby enriching the dataset and improving class coverage.

●

Categorical-to-Numerical Mapping: To facilitate downstream processing, categorical

values for COVID-19 and mobility levels are systematically mapped to numerical rep-

resentations while maintaining interpretability.This domain knowledge was iteratively

incorporated into the code, ensuring the synthetic neighbours adhered to realistic transi-

tions, captured temporal and spatial patterns, and reected meaningful diversity.

Assessment of the results

A Python script was developed to take multiple input instances from a specied le and

generate a given number of synthetic neighbours for each instance. The results are stored

in two output les: one containing categorical feature values and the other with their cor-

responding numeric representations. Below, we detail the process of testing the code and

evaluating its performance.

Using a dataset of real data, 15 input instances were randomly selected, each represent-

ing a unique combination of conditions. For each instance, 100 synthetic neighbours were

generated. Both original and synthetic instances, represented numerically, were processed

through a predictive model that assigned class labels reecting dierent COVID-19 levels.

To evaluate the eectiveness of the synthetic neighbourhood generator, we created a visu-

alization in the form of a 2D map, where points are positioned based on their similarity

in the high-dimensional feature space. To derive the 2D positions, we applied the UMAP

algorithm, which preserves both local and global data structures.

The resulting visualization is shown in Fig. 12. Larger circles represent the original

instances, while smaller rectangles correspond to the synthetic neighbours. The symbols

1 3

250 Page 28 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

are colour-coded according to their predicted classes, allowing for an overall assessment

of class distributions. Original instances are further marked with black hollow circles for

better identication.

For more detailed analysis, lters can be applied to the set of the displayed instances to

focus on dierent subsets. Fig. 13 shows the neighbours of the original instances grouped

by classes c1, c2, c3, and c4, consisting of 2, 3, 5, and 5 original instances, respectively.

Similarly, Fig. 14 illustrates the distributions of synthetic neighbours for four selected origi-

nal instances from dierent classes. These visualizations enable domain experts to assess

both the alignment of synthetic neighbours with their respective original instances and the

diversity of their predicted classes.

The visualizations reveal that the synthetic neighbours generally cluster around their

respective original instances, as expected. However, scattered neighbours are also present,

contributing to the desired diversity. Importantly, the generator produces instances diverse

enough to be classied into dierent categories by the model. While obtaining model predic-

tions is not a part of the synthetic neighbourhood generation code, this post-generation step

eectively demonstrates the utility of the synthetic data for testing and model evaluation.

Fig. 12 Original and synthetic instances obtained with the help of ChatGPT for the COVID-19 and mobil-

ity case study are represented as points on a map. The points are placed according to instance similarity.

The colours correspond to the predicted classes. The square symbols represent the synthetic instances.

Larger circles represent the 15 original instances for which the synthetic neighbours were generated.

These instances are additionally marked by black hollow circles

1 3

Page 29 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

Fig. 14 Distributions of synthetic instances generated for 4 selected original instances

Fig. 13 Distributions of synthetic instances generated for the original instances with the actual classes c1

(2 instances), c2 (3 instances), c3 (5 instances), and c4 (5 instances)

1 3

250 Page 30 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

Conclusion

This experiment demonstrated the feasibility of using an LLM to generate synthetic neigh-

bourhoods that balance randomness with domain-consistent variations. The approach can

potentially be adapted to other domains with temporal or sequential data. However, several

challenges were identied:

●

Complexity in Translating Domain Knowledge: LLMs require clear, well-thought-out

inputs to eectively encode complex domain rules. Informal descriptions may need

reformulation by experts for accurate implementation.

●

V alidation and Debugging: The LLM-generated code can occasionally deviate from the

intended logic or contain errors, requiring careful validation and iterative renements.

These tasks require coding expertise, which domain experts may not possess. Hence,

there is a need for tools that bridge this skill gap.

●

Visualization as a Feedback Tool: Visualization was instrumental in assessing the dis-

tribution and diversity of synthetic instances. However, additional visualizations are

needed to evaluate the realism of the generated feature value combinations.Overall,

while using LLMs for synthetic data generation shows signicant promise, achieving

seamless collaboration with domain experts will require advances in visualization, vali-

dation, and communication tools.

Appendix B: Using an LLM (Google Gemini) for synthetic

neighbourhood generation in the vessel movement case study

For the vessel movement case study, we made an experiment with Google Gemini version

2.5 Flash.

Prompting the LLM

The following prompt was submitted to the LLM: I need to create a Python program for

generation of synthetic data instances in the neighbourhood of a given instance. The pur-

pose is to generate local explanations of predictions produced by a model that recognises

patterns of vessel movements based on 9 features. Input data for the model consist of values

of numeric attributes characterizing segments of vessel trajectories. The model utilizes nine

features describing vessel speed characteristics, trajectory shape, and proximity to ports.

Logarithmic transformation was applied to features with highly skewed value distributions

in the training data.

●

Speed statistics: SpeedMinimum, SpeedQ1, SpeedMedian, SpeedQ3. These fea-

tures represent the speed distribution, from minimum observed speed to quartile-based

spread.

●

Log10Curvature: The logarithm of the curvature of the time series of the vessel's

distance from the starting point. The curvature is computed as the ratio between the sum

of absolute consecutive changes in the time series and the amplitude of values. A value

close to 1 indicates nearly straight movement, while higher values indicate the presence

1 3

Page 31 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

of turns.

●

DistStartTrendAngle: The angle of the linear trend tted to the time series of

the vessel's distance from its starting point. A higher angle indicates a stronger trend

of moving away, while a lower angle suggests slower movement or a return toward the

starting position.

●

Log10DistStartTrendDevAmplitude: The logarithm of the amplitude of de-

viations from the trend line of the distance to the starting point. It quanties path tortu-

osity, reecting how much the vessel's movement deviates from a straight-line trend.

Higher values indicate more erratic or zigzagging movement.

●

Port proximity: MaxDistPort, Log10MinDistPort. These features represent

the maximum and (log-transformed) minimum distance from the nearest port, which

are useful for recognizing anchoring and port manoeuvring. Log10Curvature and

Log10DistStartTrendDevAmplitude jointly describe the shape complexity of

a trajectory segment. Log10Curvature captures global movement characteristics,

while path tortuosity reects local zigzagging. T ogether, they help distinguish between

steady outward movement, looping, and in-place manoeuvring.

The features are used to classify movement behaviours in trajectory segments (epi-

sodes) to one of the six classes: 1) straight movement; 2) curved movement; 3) trawling; 4)

port-connected (entering or exiting a port); 5) near port (manoeuvring in port vicinity); 6)

anchored. Each data instance describes one episode by the 9 features listed above.

The Python program needs, for a given instance with a true or predicted class label,

perturb the feature values and thereby create a specied number of synthetic instances that

are likely to be classied as belonging to each of the 6 classes, including the class of the

given instance. It is desirable to keep balance between the numbers of instances of each

class, although it is not known in advance how the model will classify them. It is desirable

to achieve the class variety by making small changes of the feature values.

The synthetic instances must be realistic, i.e., satisfying certain constraints:

●

Numeric relationships between the speed values: SpeedMinimum

≤

SpeedQ1

≤

SpeedMedian

≤

SpeedQ3

●

Realistic SpeedQ3: should be not much higher that the maximum occurring in the

training data, which is 22.

●

High speed cannot be achieved during curvy movements.

●

The range of DistStartTrendAngle in the training data was

[− 0. 24, 0. 36]

; the

values in synthetic data should not be far beyond.

●

The same applies to Log10Curvature [0, 2.25] and Log10DistStartTrend-

DevAmplitude

[− 2. 8, 1. 8]

.

●

The smallest value of Log10MinDistPort was

− 3. 05

.Here are some examples of

instances of dierent classes: ...

Input instances for the Python program look like these but do not include the eld “Class”

with string values.

1 3

250 Page 32 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

LLM' s response

I will create a Python program that generates synthetic data instances based on a given ves-

sel movement instance. This program will perturb the feature values of the input instance,

aiming to create new instances that are likely to represent dierent vessel behaviors, while

adhering to realistic constraints.

The program will account for:

●

Nine key features: SpeedMinimum, SpeedQ1, SpeedMedian, SpeedQ3, Log-

10Curvature, DistStartTrendAngle, Log10DistStartTrendDevAm-

plitude, MaxDistPort, and Log10MinDistPort.

●

Realistic constraints: Including relationships between speed quartiles, maximum speed

limits, the interplay between speed and curvature, and specic ranges for angular and

curvature-related features, as well as port proximity.

●

Tar geted perturbations: Although we don't have the actual classication model, the

program will apply perturbations strategically to generate instances that align with the

characteristics of each of the six movement classes (straight, curved, trawling, port-

connected, near port, anchored). This approach increases the likelihood of creating di-

verse synthetic data that could be classied into dierent categories by a real model.The

output will be a list of dictionaries, where each dictionary represents a synthetic data

instance with its 9 feature values.

Here is the Python program: ...

The code was suciently good right from the beginning; only very minor changes in

data input and output were further requested.

Result

The LLM described the resulting program as follows: The provided Python program is

designed for the generation of synthetic data instances, primarily to facilitate local expla-

nations of predictions made by a vessel movement pattern recognition model. This model

operates on nine numerical features characterizing segments of vessel trajectories. The syn-

thetic data generation process ensures that the newly created instances are both diverse and

realistic, adhering to specic physical and contextual constraints.

The nine features utilized by the model and, consequently, by this generator are: Speed-

Minimum, SpeedQ1, SpeedMedian, SpeedQ3 (describing speed distribution); Log-

10Curvature (logarithm of trajectory curvature); DistStartTrendAngle (angle

of distance trend from start); Log10DistStartTrendDevAmplitude (logarithm of

deviation amplitude from trend); MaxDistPort, and Log10MinDistPort (maximum

and log-transformed minimum distance from the nearest port). Features like Log10Cur-

vature and Log10DistStartTrendDevAmplitude are critical for capturing tra-

jectory shape complexity, distinguishing between global movement and local tortuosity.

The core of the synthetic data generation lies within the SyntheticDataGenera-

tor class. For a given input instance, the program generates a specied number of synthetic

neighbors. This process involves perturbing the feature values of the original instance using

a controllable perturbation_scale. A key aspect is the strategic application of these

1 3

Page 33 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

perturbations to create instances that tend towards one of six predened vessel movement

classes: straight movement, curved movement, trawling, port-connected, near port, and

anchored. This class-tendency-driven perturbation aims to achieve a balanced variety of

synthetic instances across all classes, even without direct access to the classication model.

Crucially, the program enforces a comprehensive set of realistic constraints to ensure the

generated data remains plausible:

●

Speed Quartile Ordering:

SpeedMinimum ≤ SpeedQ1 ≤ SpeedMedian ≤ SpeedQ3

is

strictly maintained.

●

Maximum Speed: SpeedQ3 is capped at 22.0, reecting observed training data limits.

●

Speed-Curvature Interaction: High speeds are made incompatible with high curvature

values; if both occur, speed is reduced or curvature adjusted.

●

Feature Ranges: DistStartTrendAngle, Log10Curvature, and Log10Dist-

StartTrendDevAmplitude are clamped within their empirically derived training

data ranges (e.g., Log10Curvature between 0.0 and 2.25).

●

Port Proximity Minimum: Log10MinDistPort is constrained to be no less than

− 3. 05

.

●

Non-negativity: All speed values and MaxDistPort are ensured to be non-

negative.These constraints are applied after initial perturbations to correct any unrealis-

tic values, thus enhancing the delity of the synthetic dataset.

The workow integrates seamlessly with CSV le operations. The generate_and_

save_synthetic_data_from_csv function facilitates batch processing: it reads

original, labeled instances from an input CSV le, systematically generates N synthetic

neighbors for each original instance (where N is congurable), and then compiles all gen-

erated instances into a single dataset. This consolidated synthetic dataset, devoid of class

labels, is then written to a new output CSV le, ready for subsequent analysis or use in model

interpretability frameworks. This entire process provides a robust method for expanding

datasets with realistic variations, particularly valuable for exploring model behavior in the

vicinity of specic data points.

Evaluation of the program performance

To evaluate the performance of the LLM-generated synthetic data generator, we selected

120 example instances from the training data, i.e., 20 instances per class across the six

behaviour categories. For each original instance, the generator produced 100 synthetic

neighbours, resulting in a total of 12,000 synthetic instances. These were passed through

the trained pattern classication model to obtain predicted class labels. The resulting dis-

tribution of predicted classes was as follows: class 1 – 712 instances, class 2 – 1434, class

3 – 1776, class 4 – 2016, class 5 – 3756, and class 6 – 2306.

The labelled synthetic instances were analysed using visual analytics tools. Unlike the

COVID-19 case study, where feature values were categorical, this case involved numeri-

cal features, necessitating dierent visualization techniques. Specically, we used parallel

coordinates plots (PCPs), where each axis represents a feature and each line corresponds to

a data instance, connecting its values across all features.

1 3

250 Page 34 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

Figure 15 shows the comparison between the original and synthetic data. The left panel

presents the 120 real instances, while the right panel displays the 12,000 synthetic neigh-

bours generated by the LLM-based program. While the plots reveal the overall feature space

coverage, the high density of overplotted lines makes it dicult to distinguish patterns

among individual classes.

Fig. 16 Screenshots of the PCP display show the distributions of the feature values separately for each

class: 1) red - straight movement; 2) blue - curved movement; 3) green - trawling; 4) purple - port-

connected; 5) orange - near port; 6) yellow - anchored

Fig. 15 Representation of instances on a parallel coordinates plot with parallel coordinate axes represent-

ing the features. Left: Real instances. Right: Synthetic neighbours of the real instances

1 3

Page 35 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

To better explore class-specic characteristics, we applied interactive ltering to isolate

and visualize subsets of synthetic instances by their predicted classes. Figure 16 shows the

distributions of feature values for each predicted class separately. This view allowed us to

compare and assess whether the synthetic instances reect the expected behaviour patterns

of each class.

The visualizations conrm two important qualities of the generated synthetic neighbour-

hoods. First, the synthetic instances remain close to their original sources in the feature

space, demonstrating good locality. Second, they exhibit sucient diversity: feature values

vary across meaningful ranges while respecting domain constraints. This suggests that the

generator successfully balances locality and variation.

Overall, the experiment demonstrates that the LLM-generated code can produce high-

quality, domain-consistent synthetic data. The resulting neighbourhoods support model

interpretation and evaluation by providing diverse yet plausible variations of real instances.

Author contributions E.C. and S.R. prepared Figures 1, 5–8, A1, B2, and B3, and contributed to writing Sec-

tion 3.2. B.K., G.A., and N.A. prepared Figures 2–4, C4, D5–7, and E8–9, and contributed to writing Section

3.1. All authors contributed to the development of the remaining sections of the manuscript, as well as to the

writing and critical review of the entire work.

Funding Open access funding provided by Consiglio Nazionale Delle Ricerche (CNR) within the CRUI-

CARE Agreement. This work was supported by Federal Ministry of Education and Research of Germany

and the state of North-Rhine Westphalia as part of the Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Articial

Intelligence (Lamarr22B), by EU in projects SoBigData++ (grant agreement no. 871042) and CREXDAT A

(grant agreement no. 101092749), NextGenerationEU programme under the funding schemes PNRR-PE-AI

scheme (M4C2, investment 1.3, line on AI) F AIR (Future Articial Intelligence Research), and TANGO

project, grant agreement no. 101120763.

Data availability Data link is provided within the manuscript. Both datasets used are open access.

Declarations

Conict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,

which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as

you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons

licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are

included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material.

If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted

by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the

copyright holder. T o view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References

Abdul, A. M., V ermeulen, J., Wang, D., Lim, B. Y., & Kankanhalli, M. S. (2018). Trends and trajectories for

explainable, accountable and intelligible systems: An HCI research agenda. ACM. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1

1 4 5 / 3 1 7 3 5 7 4 . 3 1 7 4 1 5 6

Adadi, A., & Berrada, M. (2018). Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on explainable articial intelligence

(XAI). IEEE Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2870052

1 3

250 Page 36 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., Artikis, A., Mantenoglou, P., & Rinzivillo, S. (2024). Human-in-the-loop:

Visual analytics for building models recognising behavioural patterns in time series. IEEE Computer

Graphics and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2024.3379851

Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., & Rinzivillo, S. (2016). Leveraging spatial abstraction in trac analysis and

forecasting with visual analytics. Information Systems, 57, 172–194. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . i s . 2 0 1 5

. 0 8 . 0 0 7

Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., & Shirato, G. (2023). Episodes and topics in multivariate temporal data, 42(6),

Article e14926. https://doi.org/10.11 11/cgf.14926

Bhattacharya, A., V erbert, K., et al. (2024). Exmos: Explanatory model steering through multifaceted expla-

nations and data congurations. In: Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-

ing Systems. ACM. https://doi.or g/10.1145/3544548.3581135

Buchanan, B.G., Davis, R., & Feigenbaum, E.A. (2006). Expert systems: A perspective from computer sci-

ence. The Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance pp. 87–103.

Cheng, F., Ming, Y., & Qu, H. (2021). DECE: decision explorer with counterfactual explanations for machine

learning models. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030342

Dong, G., & Liu, H. (2018). Feature engineering for machine learning and data analytics. CRC Press. h t t p s :

/ / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 2 0 1 / 9 7 8 1 3 1 5 1 8 1 0 8 0

Endert, A., Ribarsky, W., T urkay, C., Wong, B. W., Nabney, I., Blanco, I. D., & Rossi, F. (2017). The state of

the art in integrating machine learning into visual analytics. Computer Graphics Forum. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r

g / 1 0 . 1 1 1 1 / c g f . 1 3 0 9 2

Giabbanelli, P. J., & Jackson, P. J. (2015). Using visual analytics to support the integration of expert knowl-

edge in the design of medical models and simulations. Procedia Computer Science. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 .

1 0 1 6 / j . p r o c s . 2 0 1 5 . 0 5 . 1 9 5

Gretton, A., Borgwardt, K. M., Rasch, M. J., Schölkopf, B., & Smola, A. (2012). A kernel two-sample test.

Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(25), 723–773.

Guidotti, R., Monreale, A., Giannotti, F., Pedreschi, D., Ruggieri, S., & Turini, F. (2019). Factual and coun-

terfactual explanations for black box decision making. IEEE Intelligent System h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 0 9

/ M I S . 2 0 1 9 . 2 9 5 7 2 2 3

Guidotti, R., Monreale, A., Ruggieri, S., T urini, F., Giannotti, F., & Pedreschi, D. (2019). A survey of methods

for explaining black box models. ACM Computer Survery https://doi.org/10.1145/3236009

Hohman, F., Kahng, M., Pienta, R. S., & Chau, D. H. (2019). V isual analytics in deep learning: An interroga-

tive survey for the next frontiers. IEEE Transactions on V isualization and Computer Graphics h t t p s : / / d

o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 0 9 / T V C G . 2 0 1 8 . 2 8 4 3 3 6 9

Karpatne, A., Atluri, G., Faghmous, J. H., Steinbach, M. S., Banerjee, A., Ganguly, A. R., Shekhar, S., Sama-

tova, N. F., & Kumar, V. (2017). Theory-guided data science: A new paradigm for scientic discovery

from data. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 0 9 / T K D E . 2 0

1 7 . 2 7 2 0 1 6 8

Kidd, A.L. (ed.). (1987). Knowledge Acquisition for Expert Systems: A Practical Handbook. Springer, New

Y ork, NY. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-1823-1

Kulesza, T., Stumpf, S., Burnett, M. M., Y ang, S., Kwan, I., & Wong, W. (2013). T oo much, too little, or just

right? ways explanations impact end users' mental models. IEEE Computer Society. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 .

1 1 0 9 / V L H C C . 2 0 1 3 . 6 6 4 5 2 3 5

Ponce-de Leon, M., del Valle, J., Fernandez, J. M., Bernardo, M., Cirillo, D., Sanchez-Valle, J., Smith, M.,

Capella-Gutierrez, S., Gullón, T., & V alencia, A. (2021). COVID-19 Flow-Maps an open geographic

information system on COVID-19 and human mobility for Spain. Scientic Data. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1

0 3 8 / s 4 1 5 9 7 - 0 2 1 - 0 1 0 9 3 - 5

Ponce-de Leon, M., del Valle, J., Fernández, J.M., Bernardo, M., Cirillo, D., Sanchez-V alle, J., Smith,

M., Capella-Gutierrez, S., Gullón, T., & Valencia, A. (2021). COVID19 Flow-Maps daily cases

reports. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5217386

Ponce-de Leon, M., del V alle, J., Fernández, J.M., Bernardo, M., Cirillo, D., Sanchez-Valle, J., Smith, M.,

Capella-Gutierrez, S., Gullón, T., & V alencia, A. (2021). COVID19 Flow-Maps daily-mobility for

Spain. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5539411

Ponce-de Leon, M., del V alle, J., Fernández, J.M., Bernardo, M., Cirillo, D., Sanchez-Valle, J., Smith, M.,

Capella-Gutierrez, S., Gullón, T., & V alencia, A. (2021). COVID19 Flow-Maps population data. h t t p s :

/ / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 5 2 8 1 / z e n o d o . 5 2 2 6 3 5 1

Liao, Q.V., & Varshney, K.R. (2021). Human-centered explainable AI (XAI): from algorithms to user experi-

ences. CoRR arxiv:2110.10790

1 3

Page 37 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

Lu, Y., Garcia, R., Hansen, B., Gleicher, M., & Maciejewski, R. (2017). The state-of-the-art in predictive

visual analytics. Computer Graphics Forum. https://doi.org/10.11 11/cgf.13210

Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S. I. (2017). A unied approach to interpreting model predictions. Red Hook, NY,

USA: NIPS'17, Curran Associates Inc.

Miller, T. (2019). Explanation in articial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Articail Intelli-

gence https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ARTINT.2018.07.007

Ming, Y., Qu, H., & Bertini, E. (2019). Rulematrix: Visualizing and understanding classiers with rules. IEEE

Transactions on V isualization and Computer Graphics, https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2864812

Muralidhar, N., Islam, M.R., Marwah, M., Karpatne, A., & Ramakrishnan, N. (2018). Incorporating prior

domain knowledge into deep neural networks. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data

(Big Data). pp. 36–45. https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData.2018.8621955

Peng, L., Lin, Z., Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., & Chen, S. (2025). Contextualized visual analytics for mul-

tivariate events. Visual Informatics, 9(2), Article 100234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visinf.2025.100234

Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., & Karniadakis, G. (2019). Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning

framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial dierential equations.

Journal of Computational Physics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045

Rajabi, E., & Etminani, K. (2024). Knowledge-graph-based explainable AI: A systematic review. Journal of

Information Science https://doi.org/10.1177/01655515221 112844

Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S., & Guestrin, C. (2016). “Why Should I Trust Y ou?”: Explaining the Predictions of

Any Classier. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1 145/2939672.2939778

Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., & Guestrin, C. (2018). Anchors: High-precision model-agnostic explanations. In:

McIlraith, S.A., W einberger, K.Q. (eds.) Proc. of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Articial Intel-

ligence. AAAI Press. https://doi.or g/10.1609/AAAI.V32I1.11491

Riveiro, M., & Thill, S. (2021). “that's (not) the output I expected!” on the role of end user expectations in creat-

ing explanations of AI systems. Articail Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AR TINT.2021.103507

von Rueden, L., Mayer, S., Beckh, K., Georgiev, B., Giesselbach, S., Heese, R., Kirsch, B., Pfrommer, J.,

Pick, A., Ramamurthy, R., Walczak, M., Garcke, J., Bauckhage, C., & Schuecker, J. (2023). Informed

machine learning – a taxonomy and survey of integrating prior knowledge into learning systems. IEEE

Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1 109/TKDE.2021.3079836

Sacha, D., Kraus, M., Keim, D. A., & Chen, M. (2019). V is4ml: An ontology for visual analytics assisted

machine learning. IEEE Transactions on V isualization and Computer Graphics. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 0

9 / T V C G . 2 0 1 8 . 2 8 6 4 8 3 8

Schramowski, P., Stammer, W., Teso, S., Brugger, A., Herbert, F., Shao, X., Luigs, L., & Kersting, K. (2020).

Making deep neural networks right for the right scientic reasons by interacting with their explanations.

Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(8), 476–486. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-020-0212-3

Simkute, A., Surana, A., Luger, E., Evans, M., & Jones, R. (2022). XAI for learning: Narrowing down the

digital divide between “new” and “old” experts. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3547522.3547678

Spinner, T., Schlegel, U., Schäfer, H., & El-Assady, M. (2020). explAIner: A visual analytics framework

for interactive and explainable machine learning. IEEE Transactions on V isualization and Computer

Graphics. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934629

Székely, G. J., & Rizzo, M. L. (2013). Energy statistics: A class of statistics based on distances. Journal of

Statistical Planning and Inference, 143(8), 1249–1272. https: //d oi. or g/10 . 1016 /j.j sp i.20 13.03.018 h    t t p s  :

/ / w w  w . s c i  e n c  e d  i r  e c t  . c o m   / s c i e  n c e  / a  r  t i c l  e / p i  i / S 0 3 7 8 3 7 5 8 1 3 0 0 0 6 3 3.

Teso, S., & Kersting, K. (2019). Explanatory interactive machine learning. In: Proceedings of the 2019

AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. pp. 239–245. ACM. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 4 5 / 3 3 0

6 6 1 8 . 3 3 1 4 2 9 3

Wang, J., Liu, S., & Zhang, W. (2024). V isual analytics for machine learning: A data perspective survey. IEEE

Transactions on V isualization and Computer Graphics. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2024.3357065

Zhao, J., Glueck, M., Isenberg, P., Chevalier, F., & Khan, A. (2018). Supporting hando in asynchronous

collaborative sensemaking using knowledge-transfer graphs. IEEE Transactions on V isualization and

Computer Graphics. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2017.2745279

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and

institutional aliations.

1 3

250 Page 38 of 39

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

Machine Learning (2025) 114:250

Authors and Aliations

EleonoraCappuccio 1 · BahavathyKathirgamanathan 2 · Salva toreRinzivillo 1 ·

GennadyAndrienko 2,3 · NataliaAndrienko 2,3

 Eleonora Cappuccio

eleonora.cappuccio@cnr.it

Bahavathy Kathirgamanathan

bahavathy.kathirgamanathan@iais.fraunhofer.de

Salvatore Rinzivillo

salvatore.rinzivillo@cnr.it

Gennady Andrienko

gennady.andrienko@iais.fraunhofer.de

Natalia Andrienko

natalia.andrienko@iais.fraunhofer.de

1 Institute of Information Science and Technologies “Alessandro Faedo”, CNR, Via Moruzzi 1,

56124 Pisa, Italy

2 KD - Knowledge Discovery, Fraunhofer Institute IAIS, Schloss Birlinghoven,

53757 Sankt Augustin, NR W, Germany

3 School of Science and Technology, City St George's, University of London,

Northampton Sq., London EC1V 0HB, UK

1 3

Page 39 of 39 250

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Terms and Conditions

Springer Nature journal content, brought to you courtesy of Springer Nature Customer Service Center

GmbH (“Springer Nature”).

Springer Nature supports a reasonable amount of sharing of research papers by authors, subscribers

and authorised users (“Users”), for small-scale personal, non-commercial use provided that all

copyright, trade and service marks and other proprietary notices are maintained. By accessing,

sharing, receiving or otherwise using the Springer Nature journal content you agree to these terms of

use (“Terms”). For these purposes, Springer Nature considers academic use (by researchers and

students) to be non-commercial.

These Terms are supplementary and will apply in addition to any applicable website terms and

conditions, a relevant site licence or a personal subscription. These Terms will prevail over any

conflict or ambiguity with regards to the relevant terms, a site licence or a personal subscription (to

the extent of the conflict or ambiguity only). For Creative Commons-licensed articles, the terms of

the Creative Commons license used will apply.

We collect and use personal data to provide access to the Springer Nature journal content. We may

also use these personal data internally within ResearchGate and Springer Nature and as agreed share

it, in an anonymised way, for purposes of tracking, analysis and reporting. We will not otherwise

disclose your personal data outside the ResearchGate or the Springer Nature group of companies

unless we have your permission as detailed in the Privacy Policy.

While Users may use the Springer Nature journal content for small scale, personal non-commercial

use, it is important to note that Users may not:

use such content for the purpose of providing other users with access on a regular or large scale

basis or as a means to circumvent access control;

use such content where to do so would be considered a criminal or statutory offence in any

jurisdiction, or gives rise to civil liability, or is otherwise unlawful;

falsely or misleadingly imply or suggest endorsement, approval , sponsorship, or association

unless explicitly agreed to by Springer Nature in writing;

use bots or other automated methods to access the content or redirect messages

override any security feature or exclusionary protocol; or

share the content in order to create substitute for Springer Nature products or services or a

systematic database of Springer Nature journal content.

In line with the restriction against commercial use, Springer Nature does not permit the creation of a

product or service that creates revenue, royalties, rent or income from our content or its inclusion as

part of a paid for service or for other commercial gain. Springer Nature journal content cannot be

used for inter-library loans and librarians may not upload Springer Nature journal content on a large

scale into their, or any other, institutional repository.

These terms of use are reviewed regularly and may be amended at any time. Springer Nature is not

obligated to publish any information or content on this website and may remove it or features or

functionality at our sole discretion, at any time with or without notice. Springer Nature may revoke

this licence to you at any time and remove access to any copies of the Springer Nature journal content

which have been saved.

To the fullest extent permitted by law, Springer Nature makes no warranties, representations or

guarantees to Users, either express or implied with respect to the Springer nature journal content and

all parties disclaim and waive any implied warranties or warranties imposed by law, including

merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose.

Please note that these rights do not automatically extend to content, data or other material published

by Springer Nature that may be licensed from third parties.

If you would like to use or distribute our Springer Nature journal content to a wider audience or on a

regular basis or in any other manner not expressly permitted by these Terms, please contact Springer

Nature at

onlineservice@springernature.com 

https://www.researchgate.net/deref/mailto%3Aonlineservice%40springernature.com

Citations (1)

References (44)

... The growing adoption of machine learning (ML) methods has enabled the extraction of complex multivariate patterns from high-dimensional tabular data and has facilitated a shift from rigid threshold-based rules to adaptive, data-driven decision-making mechanisms [6][7][8]. Personalized modeling strategies allow decision boundaries to be adjusted according to individual characteristics, thereby increasing robustness in heterogeneous and imbalanced data environments 

[9,

 10]. However, many existing machine learning-based studies treat thresholds or reference limits as fixed labels rather than integral components of the modeling process....

A Hybrid Ensemble Framework for Rare Event Detection in Large-Scale Tabular Data

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/401436631_A_Hybrid_Ensemble_Framework_for_Rare_Event_Detection_in_Large-Scale_Tabular_Data

Article

Full-text available

Mar 2026

Natalya Maxutova

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Natalya-Maxutova-2298881839

Akmaral Kassymova

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Akmaral-Kassymova-2211049171

Kuanysh Kadirkulov

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Kuanysh-Kadirkulov-2193260727

Zhanat Kenzhebayeva

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Zhanat-Kenzhebayeva-2257563845

Rare event detection in large tabular data remains a computationally challenging problem due to class imbalance, heterogeneous feature distributions, and unstable thresholds. Traditional machine learning approaches based on individual models and fixed thresholds often exhibit limited robustness and reproducibility in such settings. This paper proposes a hybrid ensemble framework for rare event detection that integrates heterogeneous machine learning models through threshold-aware probabilistic aggregation. The framework combines gradient-boosted decision trees, regularized linear models, and neural networks, leveraging their complementary inductive biases. To ensure reproducibility and robust performance evaluation under severe class imbalance, a leaky-controlled evaluation protocol is employed, including rootwise summation, probability calibration, and validation-based threshold optimization. The proposed approach is evaluated on a large tabular dataset containing approximately 50,000 observations. Experimental results demonstrate improved rare event detection and robust generalization performance compared to individual baseline models. Explainability is achieved through Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP)-based attribution analysis and clustering in the explanation space, enabling transparent analysis of ensemble decision-making behavior. The proposed framework represents a general-purpose computational solution for rare event detection and can be applied to a wide range of data-driven decision-making and anomaly detection problems.

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/401436631_A_Hybrid_Ensemble_Framework_for_Rare_Event_Detection_in_Large-Scale_Tabular_Data

Show abstract

Episodes and Topics in Multivariate Temporal Data

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/373474505_Episodes_and_Topics_in_Multivariate_Temporal_Data

Article

Full-text available

Aug 2023

COMPUT GRAPH FORUM

https://www.researchgate.net/journal/Computer-Graphics-Forum-1467-8659

Natalia Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Natalia-Andrienko-8263899

 Gennady Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Gennady-Andrienko

Gota Shirato

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Gota-Shirato-2241497604

The term 'episode' refers to a time interval in the development of a dynamic process or behaviour of an entity. Episode‐based data consist of a set of episodes that are described using time series of multiple attribute values. Our research problem involves analysing episode‐based data in order to understand the distribution of multi‐attribute dynamic characteristics across a set of episodes. To solve this problem, we applied an existing theoretical model and developed a general approach that involves incrementally increasing data abstraction. We instantiated this general approach in an analysis procedure in which the value variation of each attribute within an episode is represented by a combination of symbols treated as a 'word'. The variation of multiple attributes is thus represented by a combination of 'words' treated as a 'text'. In this way, the the set of episodes is transformed to a collection of text documents. Topic modelling techniques applied to this collection find groups of related (i.e. repeatedly co‐occurring) 'words', which are called 'topics'. Given that the 'words' encode variation patterns of individual attributes, the 'topics' represent patterns of joint variation of multiple attributes. In the following steps, analysts interpret the topics and examine their distribution across all episodes using interactive visualizations. We test the effectiveness of the procedure by applying it to two types of episode‐based data with distinct properties and introduce a range of generic and data type‐specific visualization techniques that can support the interpretation and exploration of topic distribution.

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/373474505_Episodes_and_Topics_in_Multivariate_Temporal_Data

Show abstract

Knowledge-graph-based explainable AI: A systematic review

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/363836432_Knowledge-graph-based_explainable_AI_A_systematic_review

Article

Full-text available

Sep 2022

J INF SCI

 Enayat Rajabi

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Enayat-Rajabi

 Farzaneh Etminani

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Farzaneh-Etminani

In recent years, knowledge graphs (KGs) have been widely applied in various domains for different purposes. The semantic model of KGs can represent knowledge through a hierarchical structure based on classes of entities, their properties, and their relationships. The construction of large KGs can enable the integration of heterogeneous information sources and help Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems be more explainable and interpretable. This systematic review examines a selection of recent publications to understand how KGs are currently being used in eXplainable AI systems. To achieve this goal, we design a framework and divide the use of KGs into four categories: extracting features, extracting relationships, constructing KGs, and KG reasoning. We also identify where KGs are mostly used in eXplainable AI systems (pre-model, in-model, and post-model) according to the aforementioned categories. Based on our analysis, KGs have been mainly used in pre-model XAI for feature and relation extraction. They were also utilised for inference and reasoning in post-model XAI. We found several studies that leveraged KGs to explain the XAI models in the healthcare domain.

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/363836432_Knowledge-graph-based_explainable_AI_A_systematic_review

Show abstract

COVID-19 Flow-Maps an open geographic information system on COVID-19 and human mobility for Spain

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/356649525_COVID-19_Flow-Maps_an_open_geographic_information_system_on_COVID-19_and_human_mobility_for_Spain

Article

Full-text available

Nov 2021

 Miguel Ponce-de-Leon

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Miguel-Ponce-De-Leon-2

Javier del Valle

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Javier-del-Valle-2197597032

 José María Fernández

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jose-Fernandez-66

 Alfonso Valencia

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Alfonso-Valencia-4

COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which has spread all over the world leading to a global pandemic. The fast progression of COVID-19 has been mainly related to the high contagion rate of the virus and the worldwide mobility of humans. In the absence of pharmacological therapies, governments from different countries have introduced several non-pharmaceutical interventions to reduce human mobility and social contact. Several studies based on Anonymized Mobile Phone Data have been published analysing the relationship between human mobility and the spread of coronavirus. However, to our knowledge, none of these data-sets integrates cross-referenced geo-localised data on human mobility and COVID-19 cases into one all-inclusive open resource. Herein we present COVID-19 Flow-Maps, a cross-referenced Geographic Information System that integrates regularly updated time-series accounting for population mobility and daily reports of COVID-19 cases in Spain at different scales of time spatial resolution. This integrated and up-to-date data-set can be used to analyse the human dynamics to guide and support the design of more effective non-pharmaceutical interventions.

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/356649525_COVID-19_Flow-Maps_an_open_geographic_information_system_on_COVID-19_and_human_mobility_for_Spain

Show abstract

Informed Machine Learning - A Taxonomy and Survey of Integrating Prior Knowledge into Learning Systems

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/351534159_Informed_Machine_Learning_-_A_Taxonomy_and_Survey_of_Integrating_Prior_Knowledge_into_Learning_Systems

Article

Full-text available

May 2021

 Laura von Rueden

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Laura-Von-Rueden

 Sebastian Mayer

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Sebastian-Mayer-14

 Katharina Beckh

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Katharina-Beckh

Jannis Schuecker

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Jannis-Schuecker-2140605858

Despite its great success, machine learning can have its limits when dealing with insufficient training data. A potential solution is the additional integration of prior knowledge into the training process which leads to the notion of informed machine learning. In this paper, we present a structured overview of various approaches in this field. We provide a definition and propose a concept for informed machine learning which illustrates its building blocks and distinguishes it from conventional machine learning. We introduce a taxonomy that serves as a classification framework for informed machine learning approaches. It considers the source of knowledge, its representation, and its integration into the machine learning pipeline. Based on this taxonomy, we survey related research and describe how different knowledge representations such as algebraic equations, logic rules, or simulation results can be used in learning systems. This evaluation of numerous papers on the basis of our taxonomy uncovers key methods in the field of informed machine learning.

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/351534159_Informed_Machine_Learning_-_A_Taxonomy_and_Survey_of_Integrating_Prior_Knowledge_into_Learning_Systems

Show abstract

Contextualized visual analytics for multivariate events

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390093889_Contextualized_visual_analytics_for_multivariate_events

Article

Mar 2025

Lei Peng

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Lei-Peng-2308288232

Ziyue Lin

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Ziyue-Lin-2288305771

Natalia Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Natalia-Andrienko-8263899

Siming Chen

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Siming-Chen-2071818018

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390093889_Contextualized_visual_analytics_for_multivariate_events

Human-in-the-Loop: Visual Analytics for Building Models Recognizing Behavioral Patterns in Time Series

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/379116755_Human-in-the-Loop_Visual_Analytics_for_Building_Models_Recognising_Behavioural_Patterns_in_Time_Series

Article

Mar 2024

IEEE COMPUT GRAPH

Natalia Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Natalia-Andrienko-8263899

 Gennady Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Gennady-Andrienko

 Alexander Artikis

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Alexander-Artikis

 Salvatore Rinzivillo

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Salvatore-Rinzivillo

Results of automated detection of complex patterns in temporal data, such as trajectories of moving objects, may be not good enough due to the use of strict pattern specifications derived from imprecise domain concepts. To address this challenge, we propose a novel visual analytics approach that combines expert knowledge and automated pattern detection results to construct features that effectively distinguish patterns of interest from other types of behaviour. These features are then used to create interactive visualisations enabling a human analyst to generate labelled examples for building a feature-based pattern classifier. We evaluate our approach through a case study focused on detecting trawling activities in fishing vessel trajectories, demonstrating significant improvements in pattern recognition by leveraging domain knowledge and incorporating human reasoning and feedback. Our contribution is a novel framework that integrates human expertise and analytical reasoning with ML or AI techniques, advancing the field of data analytics.

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/379116755_Human-in-the-Loop_Visual_Analytics_for_Building_Models_Recognising_Behavioural_Patterns_in_Time_Series

Show abstract

Visual Analytics for Machine Learning: A Data Perspective Survey

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377631981_Visual_Analytics_for_Machine_Learning_A_Data_Perspective_Survey

Article

Jan 2024

IEEE T VIS COMPUT GR

Junpeng Wang

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Junpeng-Wang-2256401005

Shixia Liu

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Shixia-Liu-2272206588

Wei Zhang

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Wei-Zhang-2181081991

The past decade has witnessed a plethora of works that leverage the power of visualization (VIS) to interpret machine learning (ML) models. The corresponding research topic, VIS4ML, keeps growing at a fast pace. To better organize the enormous works and shed light on the developing trend of VIS4ML, we provide a systematic review of these works through this survey. Since data quality greatly impacts the performance of ML models, our survey focuses specifically on summarizing VIS4ML works from the data perspective . First, we categorize the common data handled by ML models into five types, explain the unique features of each type, and highlight the corresponding ML models that are good at learning from them. Second, from the large number of VIS4ML works, we tease out six tasks that operate on these types of data (i.e., data-centric tasks) at different stages of the ML pipeline to understand, diagnose, and refine ML models. Lastly, by studying the distribution of 143 surveyed papers across the five data types, six data-centric tasks, and their intersections, we analyze the prospective research directions and envision future research trends.

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377631981_Visual_Analytics_for_Machine_Learning_A_Data_Perspective_Survey

Show abstract

XAI for learning: Narrowing down the digital divide between “new” and “old” experts

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/364264809_XAI_for_learning_Narrowing_down_the_digital_divide_between_new_and_old_experts

Conference Paper

Oct 2022

 Auste Simkute

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Auste-Simkute

 Aditi Surana

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Aditi-Surana

 Ewa Luger

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ewa-Luger-3

Rhianne Jones

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Rhianne-Jones-2189729164

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/364264809_XAI_for_learning_Narrowing_down_the_digital_divide_between_new_and_old_experts

Anchors: High-Precision Model-Agnostic Explanations

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/361521016_Anchors_High-Precision_Model-Agnostic_Explanations

Article

Apr 2018

Marco Tulio Ribeiro

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Marco-Tulio-Ribeiro-2112752854

 Sameer Singh

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Sameer-Singh-15

Carlos Guestrin

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Carlos-Guestrin-11411000

We introduce a novel model-agnostic system that explains the behavior of complex models with high-precision rules called anchors, representing local, "sufficient" conditions for predictions. We propose an algorithm to efficiently compute these explanations for any black-box model with high-probability guarantees. We demonstrate the flexibility of anchors by explaining a myriad of different models for different domains and tasks. In a user study, we show that anchors enable users to predict how a model would behave on unseen instances with less effort and higher precision, as compared to existing linear explanations or no explanations.

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/361521016_Anchors_High-Precision_Model-Agnostic_Explanations

Show abstract

“That's (not) the output I expected!” On the role of end user expectations in creating explanations of AI systems

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/351032613_That's_not_the_output_I_expected_On_the_role_of_end_user_expectations_in_creating_explanations_of_AI_systems

Article

Apr 2021

ARTIF INTELL

 Maria Riveiro

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Maria-Riveiro

Serge Thill

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Serge-Thill-50140278

Research in the social sciences has shown that expectations are an important factor in explanations as used between humans: rather than explaining the cause of an event per se, the explainer will often address other event that did not occur but that the explainee might have expected. For AI-powered systems, this finding suggests that explanation-generating systems may need to identify such end user expectations. In general, this is a challenging task, not the least because users often keep them implicit; there is thus a need to investigate the importance of such an ability. In this paper, we report an empirical study with 181 participants who were shown outputs from a text classifier system along with an explanation of why the system chose a particular class for each text. Explanations were both factual, explaining why the system produced a certain output or counterfactual, explaining why the system produced one output instead of another. Our main hypothesis was explanations should align with end user expectations; that is, a factual explanation should be given when the system's output is in line with end user expectations, and a counterfactual explanation when it is not. We find that factual explanations are indeed appropriate when expectations and output match. When they do not, neither factual nor counterfactual explanations appear appropriate, although we do find indications that our counterfactual explanations contained at least some necessary elements. Overall, this suggests that it is important for systems that create explanations of AI systems to infer what outputs the end user expected so that factual explanations can be generated at the appropriate moments. At the same time, this information is, by itself, not sufficient to also create appropriate explanations when the output and user expectations do not match. This is somewhat surprising given investigations of explanations in the social sciences, and will need more scrutiny in future studies.

View

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/351032613_That's_not_the_output_I_expected_On_the_role_of_end_user_expectations_in_creating_explanations_of_AI_systems

Show abstract

Show more

Recommended publications

Discover more

https://www.researchgate.net/search

Chapter

FIPER: A Visual-Based Explanation Combining Rules and Feature Importance

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/387636972_FIPER_A_Visual-Based_Explanation_Combining_Rules_and_Feature_Importance

January 2025

 

Eleonora Cappuccio

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Eleonora-Cappuccio

 

Salvatore Rinzivillo

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Salvatore-Rinzivillo

 

Daniele Fadda

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Daniele-Fadda

 

Rosa Lanzilotti

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Rosa-Lanzilotti

Read more

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/387636972_FIPER_A_Visual-Based_Explanation_Combining_Rules_and_Feature_Importance

Article

Visual Analytics for Human-Centered Machine Learning

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/358126498_Visual_Analytics_for_Human-Centered_Machine_Learning

January 2022

· IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications

Natalia Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Natalia-Andrienko-8263899

 

Gennady Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Gennady-Andrienko

 

Linara Adilova

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Linara-Adilova

[...]

Theresa-Marie Rhyne

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Theresa-Marie-Rhyne-2143209081

We introduce a new research area in visual analytics (VA) aiming to bridge existing gaps between methods of interactive machine learning (ML) and eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), on one side, and human minds, on the other side. The gaps are, first, a conceptual mismatch between ML/XAI outputs and human mental models and ways of reasoning, and second, a mismatch between the information 

... [Show full abstract]

https://www.researchgate.net/

 quantity and level of detail and human capabilities to perceive and understand. A grand challenge is to adapt ML and XAI to human goals, concepts, values, and ways of thinking. Complementing the current efforts in XAI towards solving this challenge, VA can contribute by exploiting the potential of visualization as an effective way of communicating information to humans and a strong trigger of human abstractive perception and thinking. We propose a cross-disciplinary research framework and formulate research directions for VA.

Read more

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/358126498_Visual_Analytics_for_Human-Centered_Machine_Learning

Conference Paper

Demo: an Interactive Visualization Combining Rule-Based and Feature Importance Explanations

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/374054652_Demo_an_Interactive_Visualization_Combining_Rule-Based_and_Feature_Importance_Explanations

September 2023

 

Eleonora Cappuccio

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Eleonora-Cappuccio

 

Salvatore Rinzivillo

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Salvatore-Rinzivillo

 

Daniele Fadda

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Daniele-Fadda

 

Rosa Lanzilotti

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Rosa-Lanzilotti

Read more

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/374054652_Demo_an_Interactive_Visualization_Combining_Rule-Based_and_Feature_Importance_Explanations

Article

Full-text available

Spatio-temporal visual analytics: a vision for 2020s

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342518584_Spatio-temporal_visual_analytics_a_vision_for_2020s

June 2020

· Journal of Spatial Information Science

Natalia Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Natalia-Andrienko-8263899

 

Gennady Andrienko

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Gennady-Andrienko

Visual analytics is a research discipline that is based on acknowledging the power and the necessity of the human vision, understanding, and reasoning in data analysis and problem solving. Visual analytics develops methods, analytical workflows, and software tools for analysing data of various types, particularly, spatio-temporal data, which can describe the processes going on in the environment, 

... [Show full abstract]

https://www.researchgate.net/

 society, and economy. We briefly overview the achievements of the visual analytics research concerning spatio-temporal data analysis and discuss the major open problems.

View full-text

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342518584_Spatio-temporal_visual_analytics_a_vision_for_2020s

Last Updated: 03 Dec 2025

Discover the world's research

Join ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.

Join for free

https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html

ResearchGate iOS App Get it from the App Store now.

https://www.researchgate.net/go.GetApp.html?_sg=tF1TdXUkxkPi8g5-HkjOYtsx86aJ8qp0fqGsl8KvhqRYbPoY8o-ZSlnpkm3rDTguFXUilsEpMh4NWq2o8uiLpxmGQhfDHnse17FMr7zUYs0&originCh=bannerStatsCopy&relativePath=publicationLoggedOut&interested=true

Install

https://www.researchgate.net/go.GetApp.html?_sg=tF1TdXUkxkPi8g5-HkjOYtsx86aJ8qp0fqGsl8KvhqRYbPoY8o-ZSlnpkm3rDTguFXUilsEpMh4NWq2o8uiLpxmGQhfDHnse17FMr7zUYs0&originCh=bannerStatsCopy&relativePath=publicationLoggedOut&interested=true

Keep up with your stats and more

https://www.researchgate.net/go.GetApp.html?_sg=tF1TdXUkxkPi8g5-HkjOYtsx86aJ8qp0fqGsl8KvhqRYbPoY8o-ZSlnpkm3rDTguFXUilsEpMh4NWq2o8uiLpxmGQhfDHnse17FMr7zUYs0&originCh=bannerStatsCopy&relativePath=publicationLoggedOut&interested=true

Access scientific knowledge from anywhere

https://www.researchgate.net/go.GetApp.html?_sg=tF1TdXUkxkPi8g5-HkjOYtsx86aJ8qp0fqGsl8KvhqRYbPoY8o-ZSlnpkm3rDTguFXUilsEpMh4NWq2o8uiLpxmGQhfDHnse17FMr7zUYs0&originCh=bannerStatsCopy&relativePath=publicationLoggedOut&interested=true

or

Discover by subject area

https://www.researchgate.net/topics

Recruit researchers

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-recruitment/?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=indextop

Join for free

https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html?hdrsu=1&_sg%5B0%5D=RHcDb7Bsa5J0Zzxpju4N-aRDmwrlD_HOBbVqQYYQ0ckqc51JFr3d_ttclhQMC4o9VTURoZkCFRh26f8QI347GW6PgUU

Login

https://www.researchgate.net/

 Email 

Tip:

 Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate login Password 

Forgot password?

https://www.researchgate.net/application.LostPassword.html

 

[x] yes Keep me logged in Log in or 

Continue with Google

https://www.researchgate.net/connector/google

 Welcome back! Please log in. Email · Hint 

Tip:

 Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate login Password 

Forgot password?

https://www.researchgate.net/application.LostPassword.html

 

[x] yes Keep me logged in Log in or 

Continue with Google

https://www.researchgate.net/connector/google

 No account? 

Sign up

https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html?hdrsu=1&_sg%5B0%5D=RHcDb7Bsa5J0Zzxpju4N-aRDmwrlD_HOBbVqQYYQ0ckqc51JFr3d_ttclhQMC4o9VTURoZkCFRh26f8QI347GW6PgUU

Company

About us

https://www.researchgate.net/about

News

https://www.researchgate.net/blog

Careers

https://www.researchgate.net/careers

Support

Help Center

https://help.researchgate.net/?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=helpcenter

Business solutions

Advertising

https://www.researchgate.net/marketing-solutions?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=advertising

Recruiting

https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-recruitment?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=recruiting

© 2008-2026 ResearchGate GmbH. All rights reserved.

Terms

https://www.researchgate.net/terms-of-service

Privacy

https://www.researchgate.net/privacy-policy

Copyright

https://www.researchgate.net/ip-policy

Imprint

https://www.researchgate.net/imprint

Consent preferences

javascript:Didomi.preferences.show()

 